Title: MATEO: A Multimodal Benchmark for Temporal Reasoning and Planning in LVLMs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.14589v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Feb 2026 03:10:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# MATEO: A Multimodal Benchmark for Temporal Reasoning and Planning in LVLMs 

## Gabriel Roccabruna † *, Olha Khomyn †, Giuseppe Riccardi 

## Signals and Interactive Systems Lab, University of Trento, Italy 

## giuseppe.riccardi@unitn.it 

## Abstract 

AI agents need to plan to achieve complex goals that involve orchestrating perception, sub-goal decomposition, and execution. These plans consist of ordered steps structured ac-cording to a Temporal Execution Order (TEO, a directed acyclic graph that ensures each step ex-ecutes only after its preconditions are satisfied. Existing research on foundational models’ un-derstanding of temporal execution is limited to automatically derived annotations, approxima-tions of the TEO as a linear chain, or text-only inputs. To address this gap, we introduce MA-TEO (MultimodAl Temporal Execution Order), a benchmark designed to assess and improve the temporal reasoning abilities of Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) required for real-world planning. We acquire a high-quality pro-fessional multimodal recipe corpus, authored through a standardized editorial process that de-composes instructions into discrete steps, each paired with corresponding images. We collect TEO annotations as graphs by designing and using a scalable crowdsourcing pipeline. Us-ing MATEO, we evaluate six state-of-the-art LVLMs across model scales, varying language context, multimodal input structure, and fine-tuning strategies. 

## 1 Introduction 

The era of autonomous agents with natural lan-guage interfaces has recently gained attention from both academia and industry. AI agents have been successfully adopted across many fields, includ-ing finance (Fatemi and Hu, 2024; Zhang et al., 2024), software development (Suri et al., 2023; Mo et al., 2025), and networking (Zhang and Zhu, 2023). Agents are autonomous systems that can accomplish goals with little or no human super-vision, a concept that dates back to the earliest 

> *

Work done while at University of Trento, prior to joining Amazon. 

> †

Equal contribution. 1) Prepare the 

> soffritto

High-Level Goal  

> ......
> Sautéing the garlic Add the celery

Planning        

> ......
> A:"What are the intermediate goals?" B:"What is a soffritto ?"
> C:"What are the ingredients?"
> D:"What are the actions needed?"
> E:"What is the Temporal Execution Order
> of the actions ?"
> Add the carrots

?   

> Must carrots go after celery,
> or is the order flexible ?

?   

> Which oil?
> //
> Hey Chef, can you help me prepare the Italian ragù sauce?

Figure 1: Example of an AI agent’s planning process and inherent uncertainties for a natural-language goal. Questions A–D decompose the high-level goal into exe-cutable actions, while E infers their Temporal Execution Order (TEO) as a directed acyclic graph. Each step in-troduces uncertainty, producing multiple possible paths, some correct, others wrong. 

days of artificial intelligence (Weizenbaum, 1966; Wooldridge and Jennings, 1995). Several frame-works have been proposed to describe the architec-ture of these systems, including the BDI (belief-desire-intention) model (Rao et al., 1995) or, more recently, the perceive-reason-act-learn paradigm in agentic AI (Raheem and Hossain, 2025). De-spite differences in terminologies and definitions, these frameworks generally decompose the agent behavior into environmental sensing, reasoning and 

> arXiv:2602.14589v1 [cs.AI] 16 Feb 2026

understanding, planning, and action execution. Planning is one of the most complex compo-nents, as it requires mapping high-level goals to executable action sequences. Its complexity in-creases when the input is natural language pro-cessing alongside other sources, such as images or sensor signals. Classical symbolic planners, such as STRIPS (Fikes and Nilsson, 1971), represent as logic conditions to be satisfied through actions defined by explicit pre- and post-conditions. Al-though these methods offer strong guarantees of soundness and completeness and are explainable by design, they depend on hand-crafted domain mod-els and thus scale poorly to dynamic environments (Acharya et al., 2025). Foundation language models offer a promising alternative, as they can directly manipulate goals and actions expressed in natural language without requiring a formal symbolic description, making them flexible to adapt to dynamic environments (Raheem and Hossain, 2025). To generate an ef-fective plan, a language model first needs to parse the goal and available actions, while addressing the inherent ambiguity of natural language and relative uncertainties, by following a process similar to that depicted in Figure 1. Specifically, it then needs to reason over this inferred information, together with parametric knowledge or retrieved external data, to construct a sequence of actions that achieves the desired goals. Current research on Large Language Mod-els (LLMs) and Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) as planners has shown serious limitations when dealing with complex tasks such as travel, flight, and calendar planning (Xie et al., 2024; Ji et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2024). Nonetheless, most assessments of these focus on plan-level metrics, such as the success rate, providing little insight into the fine-grained sources of errors. While plan-ning is generally considered a PSPACE-complete problem (Bylander, 1994), understanding whether these models can reliably infer the preconditions and effects of actions, which is a fundamental abil-ity for any planning system, might help improve their performance and deepen our understanding of their actual reasoning abilities. A possible way to investigate these abilities is to evaluate the models’ performance on the Tempo-ral Execution Order (TEO) task (Chambers, 2013; Derczynski, 2017; Vashishtha et al., 2020). In this, given two steps representing two actions, the model has to infer their temporal relation, such as which action should occur first or second, or if the actions are order-independent. Successful resolution of this requires reasoning over the actions’ implicit pre- and post-conditions. Procedural texts, such as recipes or instruction books, provide an ecologi-cally valid and scalable source of such instances, as they explicitly encode action sequences as plans expressed through stepwise natural-language in-structions. However, existing benchmarks rely on text-only procedural text (Mori et al., 2014; Lal et al., 2024), automatically derived annotations, or approximate TEO as a strictly linear chain (Wu et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2024; Qiu et al., 2025). This limits the interpretation of the model’s actual per-formance on the TEO and the insights into whether LVLMs can function as world models , i.e., systems capable of grounding plans on world observations (Chen et al., 2025). In this work, we introduce MATEO (Multimod Al Temporal Execution Order), apublicly available benchmark designed for eval-uating and improving the multimodal temporal reasoning abilities of LVLMs. MATEO assesses a model’s capability to determine the Temporal Execution Order (TEO) of a sequence of multi-modal actions, a fundamental building block for planning in real-world contexts. The benchmark comprises 300 high-quality professional recipes from a well-known Italian recipe website 1. Each recipe is organised as a sequence of steps, with every step containing both a textual description and an image illustrating the action or its outcome, ensuring quasi-perfect semantic alignment between text and visual content. Different from most existing human-annotated recipe corpora (Mori et al., 2014; Yamakata et al., 2020; Pan et al., 2020), which rely on internal annotators for TEO labelling, we employ crowdsourcing, providing a scalable and reproducible annotation methodology. The annotation process has produced a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) for each recipe, capturing the pre- and post-condition dependencies ( edges )of each action ( nodes ). Using this benchmark, we evaluate six open and closed-sourced LVLMs with various promoting strategies, including in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020), chain of thought (Wei et al., 2022), and self-reflection (Madaan et al., 2023), and fine-tuning approaches. Our findings reveal that while some models achieve state-of-the-art results with multimodal inputs, 

> 1https://www.giallozafferano.it/

the majority still struggle to effectively leverage both modalities. Furthermore, even the best performing models only achieve 0.69 accuracy, highlighting suboptimal capabilities in the TEO task and motivating future adoption of MATEO for developing novel methods to enhance temporal reasoning and real-world planning. In summary, the main contributions of this paper are: • Release MATEO, a publicly available 2 multi-modal benchmark for evaluating and advanc-ing the temporal reasoning abilities of LVLMs through the Temporal Execution Order (TEO) task; • A systematic evaluation of six open- and closed-source LVLMs using in-context learn-ing (ICL), chain-of-thought prompting (CoT), self-reflection, and fine-tuning approaches while varying the input modalities; • A set of novel guidelines for extending the benchmark to new recipes, other languages, and domains, ensuring scalability and repro-ducibility. 

## 2 Literature Review 

Planning The task of planning is to find a sequence of actions that, when executed, transitions a sys-tem from an initial state to a desired goal state (Valmeekam et al., 2023). Recent work has in-vestigated LLMs’ planning abilities by evaluat-ing them on classical planning problems, such as Blocks World (Gupta et al., 1991), showing their limitations in symbolic planning (Valmeekam et al., 2023; Kambhampati et al., 2024). However, these planning problems might be overspecific and formalized, impeding the model from leveraging any parametric knowledge, and are described with hand-crafted actions and states, impacting the flex-ibility to adapt to dynamic environments. In this regard, several benchmarks in which initial and goal states are written in natural language have been proposed. They cover various domains such as the planning of trips, meetings, and calendars (Zheng et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024). Nonetheless, these are only for sequential planning, i.e., without accounting for possible execution of simultaneous actions, and most of the proposed assessments are  

> 2GitHub: https://github.com/sislab-unitn/MATEO

based on plan-level metrics. A few studies repre-sent the plan as a graph, but they rely on machine-generated annotations (Lin et al., 2024). Although multimodal planning is a relatively new topic, a few benchmarks for investigating the planning abilities of LVLMs have been proposed, such as MPCC (Ji et al., 2025), EgoPlan-Bench2 (Qiu et al., 2025), ALFWorld (Li et al., 2024b), and procedural text corpora Wu et al. (2022); Lu et al. (2024). How-ever, all of these are limited to a linear chain of action due to goals with low uncertainty or a lack of an ad-hoc annotation. 

TEO in Recipes Recipes constitute a chal-lenging multimodal planning domain and a rich procedural-text genre for the TEO task, as their steps often form parallelizable sub-plans with par-tial ordering constraints. Among the earliest efforts to model this planning complexity are the Japanese Recipe Flow Graph (Mori et al., 2014) and the En-glish Recipe Flow Graph (Yamakata et al., 2020) corpora, which model directly the dependencies and effects of each action expressed by verbs, simi-larly to a dependency parser. Step-level dependen-cies have been extracted from the English Recipe Flow Graph to create the CaT-Bench corpus (Lal et al., 2024). Although a multimodal recipe corpus following a similar logic has been proposed (Pan et al., 2020), no public multimodal DAG corpus is currently available. Existing resources rely on non-curated web/video data, leading to inconsis-tent formats 3, and their annotations are produced by non-crowdworkers, limiting scalability and re-producibility. 

## 3 Methodology 

To evaluate the reasoning abilities required for plan-ning in LLMs and LVLMs, we introduce the Tem-poral Execution Order (TEO) task. We formulate TEO as a three-way classification problem over the temporal execution relations before and after ,and independent . These relations are semantically aligned with the before , after , and simultaneous 

temporal relations defined in Allen’s interval al-gebra (Allen, 1983). However, unlike Allen’s al-gebraic relations, which are derived from compar-isons of interval start and end points, our formula-tion infers temporal execution order from logical dependencies rather than explicit time boundaries. In particular, if action B requires a condition that is produced by the post-condition (aka effect) of 

> 3e.g., variable image counts per step, mixed unit systems.

action A, then A must be executed before B (equiv-alently, B must occur after A). Conversely, if A and B do not depend on each other’s post-conditions, including indirect or transitive dependencies (e.g., 

A → C → B, where B requires C and C requires A), then the two actions are considered indepen-dent, meaning they can be executed in any order. Given a set of action instances A and their depen-dency relations E , TEO can be represented as the graph G = ( A, E), where A are the nodes, and 

E are the edges. Specifically, this graph is a di-rected acyclic graph (DAG) because the dependen-cies have an orientation and any cycle would gener-ate a paradox, making the plan infeasible (e.g., an action dependent on its own output). Similar to Roccabruna et al. (2024) and Lal et al. (2024), for each class, we pose a corresponding ternary (Yes/No/I don’t know) question, as pre-sented in Table 1.         

> TEO class Question
> Before Must Step A be executed before Step B? After Must Step A be executed after Step B? Independent Can Step A and Step B be executed in
> parallel ?
> Table 1: Temporal Execution Order (TEO) classes and their corresponding ternary questions.

To investigate whether the models can answer these questions, we formalise the following input sequence. Since our corpus consists of recipes, we refer to actions as steps, following the natural structure of a recipe. In our corpus, a step is com-posed of an image I and a textual part T , formally 

Sj = Ij ⊕ Tj . Thus, given two steps, A and B, the model is tasked to answer the three TEO questions of Table 1, denoted as Qi, using the following input sequence: 

C ⊕ SA ⊕ SB ⊕ Q1 ⊕ Q2 ⊕ Q3

where C is the grounding context, ⊕ denotes con-catenation with a newline ("\n"). Marker tokens (“Step A picture:”, “Step A description:”, etc.) pre-cede each image and text component to further guide the model. The TEO class is then retrieved by pars-ing the model’s output by assigning class i ∈{before , after , independent }, if the model answers 

“Yes” to the corresponding Qi TEO question and 

“No” to both other Qj for j̸ = i. All the other combinations, such as answering “Yes” to multi-ple questions or responding “I don’t know” , are assigned to the class Other . This captures inconsis-tent behavior, such as simultaneously affirming the 

before and after questions, as well as uncertainty. In Chain of Thought experiments (Wei et al., 2022), the model is prompted to directly predict one of the three TEO classes. The reason for this was to simplify and shorten the demonstrations provided in the prompt. 

## 4 The Benchmark 

Our requirements for building MATEO were to identify a form of procedural text in which the tex-tual and visual components are maximally semanti-cally aligned, enabling reliable multimodal reason-ing over execution order. We have found that these criteria are met by the professionally edited recipes on GialloZafferano, a well-known Italian-language recipe website. These recipes offer several advan-tages: i) they follow an editorially-curated narrative and structural format; ii) the images are profession-ally produced, visually consistent, and captured from a near-uniform top-down perspective, mini-mizing viewpoint variability; and iii) each recipe is explicitly segmented into an ordered sequence of steps. Each step typically describes a single executable action, and the accompanying image depicts either the action’s outcome or the action in progress. Together, these properties reduce mul-timodal noise sources and enable cleaner corpus utilization 4.To build MATEO, we employed human annota-tors recruited through Prolific 5, a crowdsourcing platform. To balance crowdworker cognitive load, we divided the annotation process into batches of five recipes, with an average completion time of approximately 50 minutes per batch. We consid-ered only native Italian speakers, given that the recipes are in Italian. We set the compensation to £9.60 per hour, which falls within the platform’s recommended range. The annotators were provided with a list of steps in the order of the original recipe. They were     

> 4Because GialloZafferano’s recipes are copyright-protected and not publicly licensed for AI benchmarking, the publisher agreed to support our research initiative by providing a subset of approximately 300 recipes for release to the research community. The recipes were randomly selected via stratified sampling over dish category (e.g., appetizers, main courses, desserts) to ensure balanced coverage across recipe types.
> 5https://www.prolific.com/

tasked with linking these recipe steps into a di-rected acyclic graph by following the TEO rela-tions by an ad-hoc UI (Figure 8 and Figure 7 in the Appendix, respectively). To explain the task concisely and effectively, we provided guidelines, a short demo video, and multimodal instructions (textual and visual), along with explanatory exam-ples. The annotation platform and the guidelines 6

are shown in Appendix A.2. Additionally, to ensure data quality, annotators were required to pass a qualification test before starting the actual task. Only those who reached at least 65% accuracy on two test recipes were al-lowed to continue with the actual annotation work. The accuracy is computed as if it were a multi-label classification task, where the examples are the nodes and the labels are the outgoing nodes 7.The threshold corresponds to the 75th percentile of the score distribution computed from testing 25 crowdworkers who were not involved in the actual annotation. In total, 54 annotators 8 annotated 315 recipes, collected in 63 batches. We computed the annota-tion agreement using MASI distance metrics (Pas-sonneau, 2006), which are specifically designed for measuring agreement on multi-labelling classifica-tion tasks. The annotators reached an agreement score of 0.85 (substantial agreement) 9. Moreover, we have manually checked the annotations for spe-cific error patterns, such as graphs with isolated steps or graphs that were fully linear. At the end of this process, we discarded 15 recipes due to poor annotation quality. The resulting corpus contains 300 Italian recipes. Preliminary experiments show that some LVLMs perform worse on this task in Italian than in En-glish, probably because these models are trained primarily on English (Bai et al., 2025). For this, we translate the recipe steps from Italian to English using Llama-3-8B (Grattafiori et al., 2024), given its relatively small model size and acceptable per-                                  

> 6They will also be shared on GitHub along with the code used to conduct our experiments.
> 7To give a better visualization the data structure is n1:[n2, n 3], .., n 2: [ .. ], where n2and n3are the outgoing nodes and the “labels” of n1.
> 8Some of the annotators participated multiple times. This is because we experienced a shortage of annotators willing to perform our task, probably due to a high rejection rate.
> 9The agreement was computed on the examples used for qualifying the annotators. Although this may give an overesti-mation of the actual agreement, it was the best trade-off as we could not afford to have an overlap on the annotation due to the high amount of time needed to complete a batch.
> Train Valid Test
> # Recipes 210 30 60 # Steps 3273 477 936 AVG Steps 15.6 ±3.9 15.9 ±3.7 15.6 ±3.8 Branching Factor 1.12 ±0.43 1.16 ±0.42 1.11 ±0.38

Table 2: Splits of the annotated corpus used for training and evaluating LVLMs’ capabilities. The table reports the number of samples, the average number of steps, and the branching factor. 

formance. Before translating the full corpus, we manually verified a subset of the translations and found them to be of high quality. All the following experiments are conducted on the English transla-tions. The dataset is split into training, validation, and test sets using stratified sampling by number of steps, with a 70%/10%/20% split. The statistics of the splits are reported in Table 2. 

## 5 Experimental settings 

5.1 Models 

We select six LVLMs that vary in model size, with selection primarily based on their support for se-quences of images in the input. Our evaluation includes both open-source, namely, Qwen2.5-VL-7B, Qwen2.5-VL-72B (Bai et al., 2025), LLaVA-OneVision-7B (Li et al., 2024a), InternVL3.5-8B, InternVL3.5-38B (Wang et al., 2025), and the closed-source model GPT-5.1 10 . We could eval-uate GPT-5.1 on only 20% of the test set, selected via stratified sampling, due to budget constraints. 

5.2 Dataset 

Given the annotated DAG for each recipe, we infer the TEO classes. In a real-world setting, determin-ing temporal relations would require comparing all pairs of steps, resulting in n2 comparisons (876,096 pairs in our test set). To make evaluation tractable, we restrict comparisons only to annotated depen-dencies: step A must be executed before step B if there is a directed edge from A to B. The class 

after is the inverse of before , therefore, we have obtained the ground truth examples by swapping the steps A and B. Steps A and B are independent 

if there is no directed path from A to B or from B to A. The number of resulting relations is 1573 for the independent class, 993 for before , and 933 for the after classes. 

> 10 https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-5.1

We evaluate all models on two versions of the dataset. The first preserves the original annotation order, yielding before and independent labels. The second reverses each step pair, mapping before to 

after , while independent labels remain unchanged. With this, we can assess whether the model ac-tually understands the relations among the steps, or whether it relies on biases learnt during pre-training. 

5.3 Prompt settings 

We evaluate the planning abilities of LVLMs on the TEO task under different modalities and ground-ing contexts. Specifically, we compare text-only, image-only, and multimodal inputs, as described in Section 3. Below, we describe the grounding con-texts we used to evaluate the models. The example for each prompt template can be found in Table 5 in the Appendix A.2. 

Baseline The model is only conditioned on two recipe steps and the three TEO questions. 

Instructions We provide the model with a set of rules that explain the meaning of the TEO classes and instruct the model to respond to each question. The rules are general for the TEO task and are not specific to the cooking domain. 

In-Context Learning (ICL) The model is con-ditioned on the instructions described previously and three in-context examples for each TEO class. Each example consists of a pair of steps, the TEO questions, and the correct answers, accompanied by brief explanations to encourage the model to emulate the latent reasoning process. To limit con-text length and computation time, all in-context examples are text-only. We prepend a modality-specific instruction noting that examples contain only text descriptions, while the model input may also include images. 

Chain-of-Thought (CoT) Correctly predicting the TEO class requires understanding whether the outcome of one step is a prerequisite for completing the other. In this experiment, we explicitly ask the model to identify pre- and post-conditions of each step and then reason about their dependency. After this reasoning process, the model is tasked to directly predict the TEO class. 

Self-Reflection At the end of the CoT, the model is instructed to reflect on its answer by reviewing any inconsistencies or errors in the reasoning pro-cess, and then give the final answer. 

5.4 Fine-Tuning 

Based on the results of the prompting experiments, we have selected the best-performing small-scale model, InternVL3.5-8B, for fine-tuning. We fine-tune the model with LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) on image-only, text-only, and image-text modalities following the Instructions prompt task. To pre-vent label imbalance, we swap only dependent step pairs to generate examples for the after class. For independent step pairs, swapping does not change the label and would therefore introduce duplicate examples, potentially biasing the model toward the 

independent class. This resulted in 3,499 examples for each of the before and after classes, and 4,969 for independent . Examples of model inputs are pro-vided in Table 6 in the Appendix A.1 along with all the hyperparameters. 

## 6 Results and Error Analysis 

To evaluate models’ performance in predicting tem-poral execution order, we consider both the original and the reverse order of each step pair. This setting reflects realistic scenarios in which the true execu-tion order may be unknown. Accuracy is reported based on a consistency criterion: a prediction is considered correct only if the model remains con-sistent across both the original and swapped step orders. Specifically, for dependent pairs, the model must predict before in the original order and after 

when swapped. For independent pairs, the model must predict independent in both configurations. Table 3 reports accuracy scores across prompt-ing strategies, and after fine-tuning. All results are obtained from a single evaluation using greedy decoding to ensure reproducibility. Starting with the prompting strategies, we observe that in the baseline setting, all models perform poorly, with near-zero accuracy, indicating limited zero-shot ability on the TEO task. Adding task instructions, in-context learning, or chain-of-thought improves performance for most models, but the effectiveness of each setting depends on the model; thus, there is no universal best strategy. Furthermore, results show that self-reflection sometimes leads to lower performance compared to CoT, suggesting a limita-tion of this prompting strategy for some models. Regarding individual model performance, Qwen2.5-VL-72B achieves the highest overall accuracy among the open-source LVLMs. When using ICL with image and text inputs, it attains an accuracy of 0.68. Under the same prompting Model Modality Baseline Instructions ICL CoT Self-Reflect. 

Qwen2.5-VL-72b Image-only 0.08 0.55 0.58 0.38 0.34 Text-only 0.14 0.53 0.57 0.50 0.50 Image+Text 0.17 0.61 0.68 0.59 0.54 InternVL3.5-38b Image-only 0.01 0.51 0.53 0.49 0.44 Text-only 0.10 0.50 0.59 0.37 0.39 Image+Text 0.09 0.51 0.49 0.50 0.47 InternVL3.5-8b Image-only 0.15 0.58 0.39 0.14 0.19 Text-only 0.10 0.31 0.46 0.31 0.32 Image+Text 0.10 0.34 0.32 0.33 0.24 Qwen2.5-VL-7b Image-only 0.01 0.05 0.04 0.09 0.05 Text-only 0.01 0.11 0.08 0.15 0.09 Image+Text 0.02 0.10 0.03 0.17 0.21 

LLaVA-OneVision-7b Image-only 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 Text-only 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.22 0.09 Image+Text 0.00 0.03 0.04 0.09 0.00 GPT-5.1 Image-only 0.13* 0.54* 0.63* 0.71* 0.71* Text-only 0.07* 0.27* 0.27* 0.62* 0.62* Image+Text 0.29* 0.58* 0.7* 0.73* 0.74* 

InternVL3.5-8B Fine-tuned 

Image-only - 0.68 - - -Text-only - 0.61 - - -Image+Text - 0.69 - - -

> Table 3: Performance of LVLMs on the TEO task under different prompt strategies and fine-tuning results. We report accuracy by considering the consistency of predictions across the original and swapped orders of steps. The results in bold indicate the best results per model. *Results achieved on 20% of the test set only.

strategy, InternVL3.5-38B achieves its best performance using text-only inputs, reaching 0.59 accuracy. Among models with fewer than 10B parameters, Qwen2.5-VL-7B and LLaVA-OneVision-7B substantially underperform, with accuracy at or near zero in most settings. In contrast, InternVL3.5-8B achieves performance comparable to larger-scale models, reaching 0.58 accuracy when prompted with task instructions and image-only inputs. While the GPT-5.1 results are not directly comparable 11 (we evaluate it only on 20% of the test set), our findings suggest that it may perform better than the open-source models, achieving 0.74 accuracy with self-reflection and multimodal inputs. In contrast, some models fail to self-reflect or produce a final answer, with failure rates ranging from 2.71% for Qwen2.5-VL-72B to 81.6% for LLaVA-OneVision-7B, compared to just 0.03% for GPT-5.1. When self-reflection is successful, models largely preserve their original predictions (98.5% for GPT-5.1 and 97.0% for 

> 11 Not comparable but indicative as Qwen2.5-VL-72B on the same partition with ICL Image+Text achieves 0.66 com-pared to 0.68 on the whole test set.

Qwen2.5-VL-72B). Notably, GPT-5.1 makes only correct self-corrections (0.9%), whereas Qwen2.5-VL-72B makes nearly equal numbers of correct and incorrect self-corrections (0.14% and 0.13%), suggesting a possible reason for GPT-5.1’s stronger gains under this strategy. Although multimodal input leads Qwen2.5-VL-72b and GPT-5.1 to achieve state-of-the-art results, not all models show the same ability to leverage this modality. Indeed, other models struggle to in-corporate multimodal information, and we observe a drop in performance compared to single modali-ties. A possible explanation could be that the scale of the language decoder, with small-scale models, fails to effectively attend to different modalities. Regarding the fine-tuning experiments, InternVL3.5-8B achieves 0.69 of accuracy, which is the highest among other experiments with open-source models. When restricted to a single modality, InternVL3.5-8B also outperforms all other open-source models in that modality. Notably, image-only fine-tuning yields better performance than text-only fine-tuning. Some possible explanations are that the model cannot Model Class Baseline Instructions ICL CoT Self-Reflect. 

GPT-5.1 Before 0.8* 0.82* 0.79* 0.78* 0.79* Independent 0.39* 0.79* 0.85* 0.87* 0.87* After 0.65* 0.76* 0.7* 0.69* 0.72* Qwen2.5-VL-72b Before 0.6 0.76 0.79 0.79 0.78 Independent 0.21 0.79 0.85 0.86 0.86 After 0.5 0.71 0.71 0.42 0.43 InternVL3.5-8b Before 0.6 0.35 0.63 0.71 0.67 Independent 0.0 0.73 0.63 0.74 0.69 After 0.33 0.51 0.47 0.18 0.16            

> Table 4: Per-class F1 scores for the TEO task. Scores above the dashed line are computed on the original step order, and those below on the swapped order. Models in zero-shot show bias toward before and after relations, lowering
> independent performance. Prompting improves independent and after scores; however, after remains challenging, suggesting difficulties in reasoning over reversed temporal order. *Results achieved on 20% of the test set only.

fully leverage textual input alone, or that images more precisely capture the underlying actions, whereas textual descriptions may contain superflu-ous information, such as references to other steps, or lack sufficient contextual information. We analyze performance across individual TEO classes to identify the most challenging cases. Ta-ble 4 reports F1 scores for the before , independent ,and after classes. Because the ground-truth labels for the after class are defined on the swapped step order, we compute F1 scores for this class on the swapped dataset. In contrast, scores for the before 

and independent classes are computed using the original step order. For clarity, we present the selec-tion of three models, all under multimodal inputs; similar trends are observed across all models. Un-der the baseline zero-shot setting, models exhibit a bias toward before and after relations, lowering per-formance on the independent class. Performance on the independent class improves substantially with task instructions, ICL, and CoT prompting, while gains for the before class are more moder-ate. For Qwen2.5-VL-72B, CoT yields relative improvements of 32% and 310% for the before 

and independent classes with respect to the base-line, respectively. Moreover, the models struggle in predicting the after class, particularly under the baseline and CoT settings. This suggests a bias inherited from pre-training, where models have dif-ficulty reasoning under reversed TEO. When con-ditioned on task instructions, Qwen2.5-VL-72B achieves an F1 score of 0.71 on the after class, while InternVL3.5-8B reaches a maximum F1 of 0.51. Higher per-class scores compared to the consistency-based accuracy indicate that mod-els struggle to produce consistent predictions across the original and swapped step orders. Larger-scale models, namely Qwen2.5-VL-72B and InternVL3.5-38B, exhibit greater consistency in their predictions. In particular, they produce con-sistent responses in 75% and 68% of cases for the 

independent class, and in 69% and 73% of cases for before–after relations, respectively. In contrast, smaller-scale models struggle substantially with consistency, particularly for before–after relations; for example, InternVL3.5-8B achieves only 34% consistency under its best-performing prompting setting. This further highlights that models strug-gle to reason under the reversed temporal order. Fine-tuning improves prediction consistency, with InternVL3.5-8B achieving 76% consistency for be-fore–after pairs and 73% for independent pairs. 

6.1 Conclusion 

We introduced MATEO, a publicly available mul-timodal benchmark designed to evaluate and ad-vance the multimodal temporal reasoning and thus planning abilities of LVLMs via the Temporal Exe-cution Order task. We provided comprehensive guidelines for extending the benchmark to new recipes, languages, and domains, enabling scalable, reproducible use for both evaluation and model development. We evaluated six open- and closed-source models and demonstrated that multimodal-ity is critical for successfully performing the TEO task. Nevertheless, even the best-performing model achieved only modest performance, highlighting a possible explanation for the limited planning capa-bilities of current LVLMs. We believe that MATEO can serve as a foundation for future research and improvements in multimodal temporal reasoning and real-world planning. 

## Limitations 

The main limitation of this work lies in the prompt-ing strategies. We observed that models often interpreted instructions differently, requiring mi-nor model-specific adjustments, such as rephrasing the output format or clarifying the reasoning in-structions, and preventing a fully uniform, directly comparable evaluation. Specifically, InternVL3.5-8B failed to consistently follow the required out-put format unless a special <assistant> token was removed. We did not observe this issue with InternVL3.5-38b. Similarly, GPT-5.1 tended to by-pass the requested chain-of-thought reasoning and produce only a final answer. To fix it, we added the instruction: "you must follow the exact reasoning steps provided in the examples before providing the final answer" at the end of the prompt. Addition-ally, due to resource constraints, we were unable to explore multimodal in-context learning (ICL), leaving open the question of how combining image and text examples in ICL would affect performance. Finally, our experiments were conducted only in English; thus, the findings may not generalize to other languages. 

## Ethical Statements 

Although we believe this work raises no direct eth-ical concerns, we cannot fully rule out potential dual-use implications of our findings. 

## References 

Deepak Bhaskar Acharya, Karthigeyan Kuppan, and B Divya. 2025. Agentic ai: Autonomous intelligence for complex goals–a comprehensive survey. IEEe Access .James F Allen. 1983. Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals. Communications of the ACM ,26(11):832–843. Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wen-bin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shi-jie Wang, Jun Tang, Humen Zhong, Yuanzhi Zhu, Mingkun Yang, Zhaohai Li, Jianqiang Wan, Pengfei Wang, Wei Ding, Zheren Fu, Yiheng Xu, and 8 oth-ers. 2025. Qwen2.5-vl technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2502.13923. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, and 1 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901. Tom Bylander. 1994. The computational complexity of propositional strips planning. Artificial Intelligence ,69(1-2):165–204. Nathanael Chambers. 2013. Navytime: Event and time ordering from raw text. Delong Chen, Theo Moutakanni, Willy Chung, Yejin Bang, Ziwei Ji, Allen Bolourchi, and Pascale Fung. 2025. Planning with reasoning using vision language world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02722 .Leon RA Derczynski. 2017. Automatically ordering events and times in text , volume 677. Springer. Sorouralsadat Fatemi and Yuheng Hu. 2024. Enhancing financial question answering with a multi-agent re-flection framework. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM International Conference on AI in Finance , pages 530–537. Richard E Fikes and Nils J Nilsson. 1971. Strips: A new approach to the application of theorem proving to problem solving. Artificial intelligence , 2(3-4):189– 208. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schel-ten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mi-tra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, and 542 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Preprint , arXiv:2407.21783. Naresh Gupta, Dana S Nau, and 1 others. 1991. Com-plexity results for blocks-world planning. In AAAI ,volume 91, pages 629–633. Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2106.09685. Yiyan Ji, Haoran Chen, Qiguang Chen, Chengyue Wu, Libo Qin, and Wanxiang Che. 2025. Mpcc: A novel benchmark for multimodal planning with complex constraints in multimodal large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Confer-ence on Multimedia , MM ’25, page 5188–5197, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-ery. Subbarao Kambhampati, Karthik Valmeekam, Lin Guan, Mudit Verma, Kaya Stechly, Siddhant Bham-bri, Lucas Saldyt, and Anil Murthy. 2024. Position: Llms can’t plan, but can help planning in llm-modulo frameworks. In Proceedings of the 41st Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org. Yash Kumar Lal, Vanya Cohen, Nathanael Chambers, Niranjan Balasubramanian, and Ray Mooney. 2024. CaT-bench: Benchmarking language model under-standing of causal and temporal dependencies in plans. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 19336–19354, Miami, Florida, USA. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Peiyuan Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, and Chunyuan Li. 2024a. Llava-onevision: Easy visual task transfer. Preprint ,arXiv:2408.03326. Kanxue Li, Baosheng Yu, Qi Zheng, Yibing Zhan, Yuhui Zhang, Tianle Zhang, Yijun Yang, Yue Chen, Lei Sun, Qiong Cao, Li Shen, Lusong Li, Dapeng Tao, and Xiaodong He. 2024b. Muep: A multimodal benchmark for embodied planning with foundation models. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third Inter-national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-24 , pages 129–138. International Joint Confer-ences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. Main Track. Fangru Lin, Emanuele La Malfa, Valentin Hofmann, Elle Michelle Yang, Anthony G. Cohn, and Janet B. Pierrehumbert. 2024. Graph-enhanced large lan-guage models in asynchronous plan reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org. Yujie Lu, Pan Lu, Zhiyu Chen, Wanrong Zhu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. 2024. Multimodal procedural planning via dual text-image prompting. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 10931–10954, Mi-ami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, and 1 others. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:46534–46594. Tianjun Mo, Ziyi Jiang, and Qichang Zheng. 2025. In-teractive ai agent for code refactoring assistance: A study on decision-making strategies and human-agent collaboration effectiveness. Academia Nexus Jour-nal , 4(1). Shinsuke Mori, Hirokuni Maeta, Yoko Yamakata, and Tetsuro Sasada. 2014. Flow graph corpus from recipe texts. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14) , pages 2370–2377, Reykjavik, Iceland. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). Liangming Pan, Jingjing Chen, Jianlong Wu, Shaoteng Liu, Chong-Wah Ngo, Min-Yen Kan, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Tat seng Chua. 2020. Multi-modal cooking work-flow construction for food recipes. Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Multime-dia .Rebecca Passonneau. 2006. Measuring agreement on set-valued items (MASI) for semantic and pragmatic annotation. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’06) , Genoa, Italy. European Language Re-sources Association (ELRA). Lu Qiu, Yi Chen, Yuying Ge, Yixiao Ge, Ying Shan, and Xihui Liu. 2025. Egoplan-bench2: A benchmark for multimodal large language model planning in real-world scenarios. Preprint , arXiv:2412.04447. Tayiba Raheem and Gahangir Hossain. 2025. Agen-tic ai systems: Opportunities, challenges, and trust-worthiness. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Electro Information Technology (eIT) , pages 618– 624. IEEE. Anand S Rao, Michael P Georgeff, and 1 others. 1995. Bdi agents: From theory to practice. In Icmas , vol-ume 95, pages 312–319. Gabriel Roccabruna, Massimo Rizzoli, Giuseppe Ric-cardi, and 1 others. 2024. Will llms replace the encoder-only models in temporal relation classifi-cation? In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Association for Computational Linguistics. Samdyuti Suri, Sankar Narayan Das, Kapil Singi, Kuntal Dey, Vibhu Saujanya Sharma, and Vikrant Kaulgud. 2023. Software engineering using au-tonomous agents: Are we there yet? In 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Au-tomated Software Engineering (ASE) , pages 1855– 1857. IEEE. Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Sarath Sreed-haran, and Subbarao Kambhampati. 2023. On the planning abilities of large language models: a critical investigation. In Proceedings of the 37th Interna-tional Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Siddharth Vashishtha, Adam Poliak, Yash Kumar Lal, Benjamin Van Durme, and Aaron Steven White. 2020. Temporal reasoning in natural language inference. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 4070–4078. Weiyun Wang, Zhangwei Gao, Lixin Gu, Hengjun Pu, Long Cui, Xingguang Wei, Zhaoyang Liu, Linglin Jing, Shenglong Ye, Jie Shao, Zhaokai Wang, Zhe Chen, Hongjie Zhang, Ganlin Yang, Haomin Wang, Qi Wei, Jinhui Yin, Wenhao Li, Erfei Cui, and 56 others. 2025. Internvl3.5: Advancing open-source multimodal models in versatility, reasoning, and effi-ciency. Preprint , arXiv:2508.18265. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and 1 others. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elic-its reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824– 24837. Joseph Weizenbaum. 1966. Eliza—a computer program for the study of natural language communication be-tween man and machine. Communications of the ACM , 9(1):36–45. Michael Wooldridge and Nicholas R Jennings. 1995. In-telligent agents: Theory and practice. The knowledge engineering review , 10(2):115–152. Te-Lin Wu, Alex Spangher, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Marjorie Freedman, Ralph Weischedel, and Nanyun Peng. 2022. Understanding multimodal procedural knowledge by sequencing multimodal instructional manuals. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4525–4542, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Tinghui Zhu, Renze Lou, Yuandong Tian, Yanghua Xiao, and Yu Su. 2024. Travelplanner: a benchmark for real-world planning with language agents. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ,ICML’24. JMLR.org. Yoko Yamakata, Shinsuke Mori, and John Carroll. 2020. English recipe flow graph corpus. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages 5187–5194, Marseille, France. Eu-ropean Language Resources Association. Wentao Zhang, Lingxuan Zhao, Haochong Xia, Shuo Sun, Jiaze Sun, Molei Qin, Xinyi Li, Yuqing Zhao, Yilei Zhao, Xinyu Cai, and 1 others. 2024. A multi-modal foundation agent for financial trading: Tool-augmented, diversified, and generalist. In Proceed-ings of the 30th acm sigkdd conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 4314–4325. Xi Zhang and Qixuan Zhu. 2023. Ai-enabled network-functions virtualization and software-defined archi-tectures for customized statistical qos over 6g mas-sive mimo mobile wireless networks. IEEE Network ,37(2):30–37. Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Hugh Zhang, Xinyun Chen, Minmin Chen, Azade Nova, Le Hou, Heng-Tze Cheng, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, and Denny Zhou. 2024. Natural plan: Benchmark-ing llms on natural language planning. Preprint ,arXiv:2406.04520. 

## A Appendix 

A.1 Experimental details 

We used the HuggingFace framework to run exper-iments with open-source models. For generation, we employed greedy decoding ( do_sample=False ,

num_beams=1 ) for all open-source models to fos-ter reproducibility. We used the following model checkpoints: Qwen2.5-VL-72b 12 , Qwen2.5-VL-7b 13 , InternVL3.5-8b 14 , InternVL3.5-38b 15 , and LLaVA-OneVision-7b 16 .To run closed-source GPT-5.1 17 model, we used OpenAI Batch API 18 . As with the open-source models, we used greedy decoding for reproducibil-ity ( temperature=0 ). Since we wanted the model to follow our reasoning steps (e.g. CoT exper-iment), we disabled the model’s default inter-nal reasoning by setting reasoning={"effort": "none"} .For fine-tuning, we used a batch size of 1, a learning rate of 1e-5, and a weight decay of 0.01. The models were fine-tuned for 1 epoch. We used Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) to fine-tune the model. We set alpha to 32 and rank to 16. LoRA adapters are applied to the query, key, value, and output matrices of the attention layers. Experiments involving Qwen2.5-VL-72B, InternVL3.5-38B, and fine-tuning were conducted using two NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 80 GiB of memory, while all other experiments were run on a single NVIDIA A100 with 80 GiB of memory. For the experiments with GPT-5.1, we spent a total of around $100, considering both experimentation and computing the results presented in this article. While for collecting the corpus, we spent a total of around £800, considering both tests and the actual annotation. The parameters used to screen the participant sample provided by Prolific were as follows: • First language: Italian • Country of Birth: Italy • Education: High school diploma/A-levels or above • Approval rate: 95-100 • Number of previous submissions: 100-10000 

> 12 https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2. 5-VL-72B-Instruct
> 13 https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2. 5-VL-7B-Instruct
> 14 https://huggingface.co/OpenGVLab/InternVL3_ 5-8B-HF
> 15 https://huggingface.co/OpenGVLab/InternVL3_ 5-38B-HF
> 16 https://huggingface.co/lmms-lab/ llava-onevision-qwen2-7b-ov
> 17 Model snapshot: gpt-5.1-2025-11-13
> 18 https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/batch

A.2 Additional Material Prompt Setting Modality Prompt 

Baseline Image-only Using ONLY the information in the Context, answer the following three questions in EXACTLY this format: Q1: The answer is: <Yes/No/I don’t know>. Q2: The answer is: <Yes/No/I don’t know>. Q3: The answer is: <Yes/No/I don’t know>. Do not add anything else. Do not explain. Do not change the format. Context: Step A picture: [image_A] Step B picture: [image_B] Questions: Q1: Must Step A be executed before Step B? Q2: Must Step A be executed after Step B? Q3: Can Step A and Step B be executed in parallel? Text-only Using ONLY the information in the Context ... Context: Step A description: [description_A] Step B description: [description_B] Questions ... Image-Text Using ONLY the information in the Context ... Context: Step A picture: [image_A] Step A description: [description_A] Step B picture: [image_B] Step B description: [description_B] Questions ... Instructions Image-only Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. Follow these rules: - Before : Step A must be executed before Step B if the outcome of Step A is required to complete Step B (i.e., Step B depends on Step A). - After : Step A must be executed after Step B if the outcome of Step B is required to complete Step A (i.e., Step A depends on Step B). -Parallel : Step A and Step B can be executed in parallel if neither step depends on the outcome of the other; therefore, their order of execution can be arbitrary. Using ONLY the information in the Context ... Context: ... Questions: ... Text-only Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. Follow these rules: - Before: ... - After: ... - Parallel: ... Ignore sequencing terms (e.g., ’first’, ’then’, ’lastly’, and other words that may appear in the text for the natural flow of the recipe) when determining the execution order, and focus only on the action itself. Prompt Setting Modality Prompt 

Using ONLY the information in the Context ... Context: ... Questions: ... Image-Text Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. Follow these rules: - Before: ... - After: ... - Parallel: ... Ignore sequencing terms (e.g., ’first’, ’then’, ’lastly’, and other words that may appear in the text for the natural flow of the recipe) when determining the execution order, and focus only on the action itself. Also note that the text description may include partial or full references to steps not shown in the image; in such cases, rely on the actions depicted in the image. Using ONLY the information in the Context ... Context: ... Questions: ... In-context learning Image-only Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. Follow these rules: - Before: ... - After: ... - Parallel: ... 

You will be shown three examples demonstrating how to solve the task using text-based step descriptions. However, your actual input will consist of images, and your reasoning should be based on the actions depicted in those images. 

Examples: Step A description: Grate the lemon zest. Step B description: Put the grated lemon zest into the strawberry sauce. Questions: Q1: Must Step A be executed before Step B? Q2: Must Step A be executed after Step B? Q3: Can Step A and Step B be executed in parallel? Q1: The answer is: Yes. Q2: The answer is: No. Q3: The answer is: No. Explanation: Step B explicitly depends on Step A - lemon zest must already be grated (Step A) before it can be put into the strawberry sauce (Step B); therefore, Step A must be executed before Step B. Step A description: Add the celery. Step B description: Then add carrots. Questions: Q1: Must Step A be executed before Step B? Q2: Must Step A be executed after Step B? Q3: Can Step A and Step B be executed in parallel? Q1: The answer is: No. Prompt Setting Modality Prompt 

Q2: The answer is: No. Q3: The answer is: Yes. Explanation: Both actions are independent; neither step produces something the other one requires. Step A description: Pour it into the cup. Step B description: Measure out raspberry juice. Questions: Q1: Must Step A be executed before Step B? Q2: Must Step A be executed after Step B? Q3: Can Step A and Step B be executed in parallel? Q1: The answer is: No. Q2: The answer is: Yes. Q3: The answer is: No. Explanation: Step A relies on the outcome of Step B - raspberry juice must be poured into the cup (Step A) after it is measured out (Step B); therefore, Step A must be executed after Step B. Using ONLY the information in the Context ... Context: ... Questions: ... Text-only Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. Follow these rules: - Before: ... - After: ... - Parallel: ... Ignore sequencing terms ... 

You will be shown three examples demonstrating how to solve the task using text-based step descriptions. 

Examples: ... Using ONLY the information in the Context ... Context: ... Questions: ... Image-Text Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. Follow these rules: - Before: ... - After: ... - Parallel: ... Ignore sequencing terms ... 

You will be shown three examples demonstrating how to solve the task using text-based step descriptions. However, your actual input will consist of both images and text descriptions, and your reasoning should be based on both actions shown in the images and the accompanying textual descriptions. 

Examples: ... Using ONLY the information in the Context ... Context: ... Questions: ... CoT Image-only Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. You must choose from: Before, After, or Parallel .Follow these rules: Prompt Setting Modality Prompt 

- Before: ... - After: ... - Parallel: ... 

You will be shown three examples demonstrating how to solve the task using text-based step descriptions. However, your ac-tual input will consist of images, and your reasoning should be based on the actions depicted in those images. You must follow the reasoning steps shown in the examples before answering. 

Examples: Step A description: Grate the lemon zest. Step B description: Put the grated lemon zest into the strawberry sauce. Step A produces: Grated lemon zest. Step B produces: Lemon zest inside the strawberry sauce. Step A requires: A lemon. Step B requires: Lemon zest that has been grated. Dependency analysis: Step B explicitly depends on Step A - lemon zest must already be grated (Step A) before it can be put into the strawberry sauce (Step B); therefore, Step A must be executed before Step B. The answer is: Before. Step A description: Add the celery. Step B description: Then add carrots. Step A produces: A component with the celery added. Step B produces: A component with the carrots added. Step A requires: The celery. Step B requires: The carrots. Dependency analysis: Each step adds a separate ingredient, and neither depends on the other, so they can occur in any order. The answer is: Parallel. Step A description: Pour it into the cup. Step B description: Measure out raspberry juice. Step A produces: The cup with raspberry juice poured in it. Step B produces: Raspberry juice that was measured out. Step A requires: Raspberry juice that was measured out. Step B requires: Raspberry juice. Dependency analysis: Step A relies on the outcome of Step B -raspberry juice must be poured into the cup (Step A) after it is measured out (Step B); therefore, Step A must be executed after Step B. The answer is: After. Step A picture: ... Text-only Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. You must choose from: Before, After, or Parallel .Follow these rules: Prompt Setting Modality Prompt 

- Before: ... - After: ... - Parallel: ... Ignore sequencing terms ... 

You will be shown three examples demonstrating how to solve the task using text-based step descriptions. You must follow the reasoning steps shown in the examples before answering. 

Examples: ... Step A description: ... Image-Text Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. You must choose from: Before, After, or Parallel .Follow these rules: - Before: ... - After: ... - Parallel: ... 

You will be shown three examples demonstrating how to solve the task using text-based step descriptions. However, your actual input will consist of both images and text descriptions, and your reasoning should be based on both actions shown in the images and the accompanying textual descriptions. You must follow the reasoning steps shown in the examples before answering. 

Examples: ... Step A picture: ... Step A description: ... Self-reflection Image-only Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. You must choose from: Before, After, or Parallel .Follow these rules: - Before: ... - After: ... - Parallel: ... You will be shown three examples demonstrating how to solve the task using text-based step descriptions. However, your actual input will consist of images, and your reasoning should be based on the actions depicted in those images. You must follow the reasoning steps shown in the examples before answering. After you answer the question, review your reasoning and check whether your answer logically follows from the context and dependencies you identified. After self-reflection, provide your final answer, confirming or correcting your initial choice. 

Examples: Step A description: Grate the lemon zest. Step B description: Put the grated lemon zest into the strawberry sauce. Prompt Setting Modality Prompt 

Step A produces: Grated lemon zest. Step B produces: Lemon zest inside the strawberry sauce. Step A requires: A lemon. Step B requires: Lemon zest that has been grated. Dependency analysis: Step B explicitly depends on Step A - lemon zest must already be grated (Step A) before it can be put into the strawberry sauce (Step B); therefore, Step A must be executed before Step B. The answer is: Before. 

Reflection: <your_reflection> The final answer: <final_answer> 

... Step A picture: ... Text-only Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. You must choose from: Before, After, or Parallel .Follow these rules: - Before: ... - After: ... - Parallel: ... Ignore sequencing terms ... You will be shown three examples demonstrating how to solve the task using text-based step descriptions. You must follow the reasoning steps shown in the examples before answering. After you answer the question, review your reasoning and check whether your answer logically follows from the context and dependencies you identified. After self-reflection, provide your final answer, confirming or correcting your initial choice. 

Examples: ... Step A description: ... Image-Text Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. You must choose from: Before, After, or Parallel .Follow these rules: - Before: ... - After: ... - Parallel: ... 

You will be shown three examples demonstrating how to solve the task using text-based step descriptions. However, your actual input will consist of both images and text descriptions, and your reasoning should be based on both actions shown in the images and the accompanying textual descriptions. You must follow the reasoning steps shown in the examples before answering. 

Examples: ... Step A picture: ... Prompt Setting Modality Prompt 

Step A description: ... 

Table 5: Prompt schema used for models evaluation under image-only, text-only, and image–text modalities. Repeated or previously described components are omitted for brevity. Modality Prompt 

Image-only <User> Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. Follow these rules: - Before : Step A must be executed before Step B if the outcome of Step A is required to complete Step B (i.e., Step B depends on Step A). - After : Step A must be executed after Step B if the outcome of Step B is required to complete Step A (i.e., Step A depends on Step B). -Parallel : Step A and Step B can be executed in parallel if neither step depends on the outcome of the other; therefore, their order of execution can be arbitrary. Step A picture: [image_A] Step B picture: [image_B] Questions: Q1: Must Step A be executed before Step B? Q2: Must Step A be executed after Step B? Q3: Can Step A and Step B be executed in parallel? <Assistant> Q1: The answer is: Yes. Q2: The answer is: No. Q3: The answer is: No. Text-only <User> Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. Follow these rules: - Before: ... Ignore sequencing terms (e.g., ’first’, ’then’, ’lastly’, and other words that may appear in the text for the natural flow of the recipe) when determining the execution order, and focus only on the action itself. Step A description: [description_A] Step B description: [description_B] Questions: Q1: Must Step A be executed before Step B? Q2: Must Step A be executed after Step B? Q3: Can Step A and Step B be executed in parallel? <Assistant> Q1: The answer is: No. Q2: The answer is: No. Q3: The answer is: Yes. Image-Text <User> Your task is to determine the dependency order between two steps in a recipe. Follow these rules: - Before: ... Ignore sequencing terms (e.g., ’first’, ’then’, ’lastly’, and other words that may appear in the text for the natural flow of the recipe) when determining the execution order, and focus only on the action itself. Also note that the text description may include partial or full references to steps not shown in the image; in such cases, rely on the actions depicted in the image. Step A description: [description_A] Step B description: [description_B] Questions: Q1: Must Step A be executed before Step B? Q2: Must Step A be executed after Step B? Q3: Can Step A and Step B be executed in parallel? <Assistant> Q1: The answer is: No. Q2: The answer is: Yes. Q3: The answer is: No. 

Table 6: Example of prompt–response pairs used for fine-tuning across image-only, text-only, and image–text modalities. Each example includes instructions, input structure, and expected binary outputs. The <User> and <Assistant> tokens are model-specific and are included here solely for illustrative purposes. Figure 2: This figure shows the first two points of the annotation guidelines, that present the purpose and the general description of the task. 

A.3 AI tool usage 

During the development phase, we used ChatGPT and Gemini to identify and resolve implementation bugs. We also leveraged these models and Grammarly to suggest rephrasing that improves the fluency and readability of the manuscript. Additionally, we have experimented with using Google Scholar Labs to expand and refine our literature review. 

A.4 Licences of the corpus and models used 

All models used in our experiments have been utilised in accordance with their respective licenses. We plan to license the corpus with the Creative Commons 4.0 CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 (Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike). The intended use of this corpus will be only for scientific research purposes. Figure 3: This section of the annotation guidelines offers annotators the option to watch a demonstration video that walks through the task and explains how to identify dependencies between steps. Following the video, annotators are provided with a textual description that formally defines each dependency, accompanied by illustrative examples. Figure 4: This figure continues from the previous one, illustrating a case in which a step depends on another (Example 1.1), and presenting the formal definition of independent steps Figure 5: This figure shows an example given to illustrate the case in which steps are independent. Figure 6: Example illustrating a fully annotated DAG for a recipe, with all relations clearly explained. Figure 7: Illustration of the annotation tool as presented in the annotation guidelines. Highlighted regions (marked in red letters) indicate key functionalities, including dragging steps, adding or deleting connections, and saving the annotations. Figure 8: Example of a DAG annotated by a crowd-worker. Steps 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 can be executed in any order (or simultaneously), thus there is no directed edge between them.