Title: Why Are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable?

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.03612v2

Published Time: Fri, 06 Mar 2026 01:35:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
# Why Are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

William Merrill 1 Hongjian Jiang 2 Yanhong Li 1 Anthony Lin 2 3 Ashish Sabharwal 1

# Abstract 

The community is increasingly exploring linear RNNs (LRNNs) as language models, motivated by their expressive power and parallelizability. While prior work establishes the expressivity ben-efits of LRNNs over transformers, it is unclear what makes LRNNs—but not traditional, nonlin-ear RNNs—as easy to parallelize in practice as transformers. We answer this question by provid-ing a tight connection between types of RNNs and standard complexity classes. We show that LRNNs can be viewed as log-depth (bounded fan-in) arithmetic circuits, which represents only a slight depth overhead relative to log-depth boolean circuits that transformers admit. Further-more, we show that nonlinear RNNs can solve 

L-complete problems (and even P-complete ones, under polynomial precision), revealing a funda-mental barrier to parallelizing them as efficiently as transformers. Our theory also identifies fine-grained expressivity differences between recent popular LRNN variants: permutation-diagonal LRNNs are NC 1-complete whereas diagonal-plus-low-rank LRNNs are more expressive ( PNC 1-complete). We provide further insight by asso-ciating each type of RNN with a corresponding automata-theoretic model that it can simulate. To-gether, our results reveal fundamental tradeoffs between nonlinear RNNs and different variants of LRNNs, providing a foundation for designing LLM architectures that achieve an optimal bal-ance between expressivity and parallelism. 

# 1. Introduction 

Parallelism and expressive power are both desirable proper-ties in an LLM architecture that are, unfortunately, at odds (Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023). RNN architecture design re-flects this tradeoff: while older RNNs were nonlinear and      

> 1Allen Institute for AI 2Rheinland-Pf ¨alzische Technische Uni-versit ¨at 3Max-Planck Institute for Software Systems. Correspon-dence to: William Merrill <willm@allenai.org >.
> Preprint. March 6, 2026.

highly sequential (Elman, 1990; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), more recent RNN architectures prefer a linear state update (Bradbury et al., 2017; Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Gu & Dao, 2024, inter alia) to enable parallel processing of long sequences (Blelloch, 1990). Linear RNNs (LRNNs) have been shown to be surprisingly theoretically expres-sive relative to transformers (Merrill et al., 2024; Grazzi et al., 2025) and practically performant (Beck et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025; Peng et al., 2025), but it remains unclear how LRNNs and nonlinear RNNs compare in expressive power, or, conversely, whether fundamental barriers prevent parallelizing nonlinear RNNs to the same degree as LRNNs. In this work, we theoretically compare the parallelizability and expressive power of nonlinear RNNs and LRNNs. A core result is a conditional separation in expressive power between the two classes: whereas LRNNs are in PNC 1

(Theorem 3), nonlinear RNNs can express P-complete prob-lems with polynomial precision (Corollary 2) or L-complete problems when restricted to log precision (Theorem 2). In either regime, this suggests nonlinear RNNs can represent substantially less parallelizable computation that’s beyond the capabilities of LRNNs, assuming PNC 1̸ = P with poly precision, or PNC 1̸ = L with log precision. Conversely, these expressivity results have implications for the degree to which different types of RNNs can be paral-lelized. It follows that LRNNs—regardless of precision— can be simulated by NC circuits of depth O(log n log ∗ n),i.e., with a negligible depth overhead of O(log ∗ n) beyond the wall-clock time we would expect for simulating a trans-former. In contrast, nonlinear RNNs with log precision likely require Ω(log 2 n) depth, constituting a O(log n) over-head relative to a transformer. Moreover, with polynomial precision, nonlinear RNNs require more than polylog depth to simulate with bounded fan-in circuits, assuming NC ̸ = P.Beyond comparing nonlinear RNNs and LRNNs, we also compare the finegrained expressivity of different LRNN variants within PNC 1. In particular, we consider differences between several different parameterizations that can express 

NC 1-complete problems, showing that diagonal-plus-low-rank (DPLR) LRNNs like DeltaNet (Yang et al., 2024; Grazzi et al., 2025) and RWKV-7 (Peng et al., 2025) can express PNC 1-complete problems, whereas permutation-diagonal (PD) LRNNs (Terzic et al., 2025) are in NC 1.1

> arXiv:2603.03612v2 [cs.LG] 5 Mar 2026

Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable?             

> TC 0
> Ungated / Diag.
> (S4, Mamba)
> NC 1
> PD LRNN
> (PD-SSM)
> PNC 1
> DPLR LRNN
> (DeltaNet, RWKV-7)
> L
> Nonlinear RNN
> with log precision
> P
> Nonlinear RNN
> Complexity class:
> RNN model class:
> Specific models:
> NC circuit depth (upper bound): log( n)log( n)log( n) log ∗(n)log 2(n)beyond polylog( n)
> Automaton class (lower bound): —DWFA WFA Counter machine Turing machine

Figure 1. Main results, summarized as a hierarchy of increasingly expressive RNN classes with popular models within each class. Each RNN shown is “tight” for the respective complexity class C (PNC 1, L, etc.) in the sense that both falls in C and can solve a C-complete problem. LRNNs are in PNC 1, implying they can be nearly as efficiently parallelized as transformers, incurring only a small O(log ∗(n)) 

depth overhead in terms of bounded fan-in boolean circuits. Nonlinear RNNs, in contrast, can solve L-complete and even P-complete problems, but this comes at the cost of being less parallelizable, requiring notably deeper circuits. Bottom row lists the classes of automata that each RNN model class can simulate, where WFA stands for weighted finite automaton and DWFA stands for deterministic WFA. 

These results, combined with our other results about nonlin-ear RNNs, yield a comprehensive hierarchy of the expres-sivity landscape for RNNs that is summarized in Figure 1. Beyond our complexity characterization, we also associate each RNN and LRNN class with a corresponding automata-theoretic model from prior work (Peng et al., 2018; Weiss et al., 2018; Merrill et al., 2020) that this class can simulate. Finally, we find empirically that our results 1 about RNNs’ expressivity predict their behavior when trained on syn-thetic tasks. On an L-complete graph connectivity task, only nonlinear RNNs achieve good performance, as the-ory predicts. In addition, both nonlinear RNNs and DPLR LRNNs learn iterated matrix multiplication problem ( PNC 1-complete), but transformers and Mamba cannot, in line with theory. These tasks provide potential synthetic benchmarks for LRNN architecture development beyond the traditional state tracking and recall tasks that are currently popular (e.g., Arora et al., 2024; Beck et al., 2024; Peng et al., 2025). Overall, our theoretical results reveal the fundamental trade-offs in expressivity and parallelism between linear and non-linear RNNs. Moreover, we show finegrained differences in expressivity between LRNNs. Taken together, we hope our results can help the community continue to refine LRNN architectures to push the frontier between expressivity and parallelism as much as possible up to fundamental barriers. 

# 2. Preliminaries 

We first introduce the datatypes we use to model bounded-precision arithmetic, as well as various LRNN architectures. We then turn to introducing computational models from 

> 1

Code link: https://arg-git.informatik.uni-k l.de/pub/LinearRNN 

circuit complexity and and formal language theory that will be relevant in our analysis of LRNNs. 

2.1. Datatypes 

Analyzing LLM architectures via circuit complexity re-quires making assumptions about the underlying datatype. Prior work has considered various options while trying to ensure nice numerical properties like associativity and com-mutativity (Merrill et al., 2024). In this work, guided by the theory of weighted finite automata, we make these desider-ata more explicit by asserting that the numeric datatype should be a semiring, denoted ⟨K, ⊕, ⊗⟩ . That is, addition and multiplication should be associative with identities, ad-dition should commute, and multiplication should distribute over addition This makes the output of LRNNs more cleanly defined in an implementation-agnostic way, and also makes WFA and matrix multiplication computations well-defined for these datatypes (which will be important). In particular, we will work with the standard rational semir-ing used in prior analysis, (i.e., polynomial-precision ratio-nal numbers; Chiang, 2025), though other semirings are possible in principle. 

Definition 1. Rational numbers, Q, form the rational semir-ing with the standard arithmetic semantics for ⊕ and ⊗.We assume Q admits an order > in the standard way. Addi-tionally, we equip Q with division in order to capture layer normalization Finally, we define non-linear functions √·

and exp via their Taylor series approximation in terms of 

⊕ and ⊗ to O(poly( n)) terms (cf. Chiang, 2025). Each of these operations can be given poly- or log-precision variants, which return an (nc)- or (c log n)-bit approximation using this technique, respectively (see Definition 10 ). A natural notion for describing “simple” arithmetic func-2Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

tions will be the following: 

Definition 2 (Arithmetic Closed Form) . f : Kk → K has an arithmetic closed form if it can be written as a finite composition of ⊕, ⊗, exp , and √· as defined in datatype K.The following property about closed forms will be useful: 

Lemma 1 (Chiang, 2025) . If f : Qk → Q has an arithmetic closed form, then f can be computed in FO -uniform TC 0.

2.2. Nonlinear RNNs 

An RNN over a datatype K (generally Q) is a neural net-work component that takes as input a sequence of vectors 

x1, . . . , x n ∈ Kd and outputs a new sequence y1, . . . , y n ∈

Kd that sequentially mixes them. Classical RNNs (Elman, 1990; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) were defined by updating a recurrent state vector via the application of some (generally nonlinear) function: 

Definition 3 (Nonlinear RNN) . Given x1, . . . , xn ∈

Kd, an RNN computes a a sequence of recurrent states 

h1, . . . , hn ∈ Kd via ht = f (ht−1, xt), where f is a closed-form arithmetic function (cf. Definition 2). We consider two nonlinear RNN parameterizations. First, 

ReLU RNNs are nonlinear RNNs with f (ht−1, xt) =max {Ah t−1 + Bx t, 0}. More generally, we will some-times consider the more general MLP RNN where f can be a multi-layer feedforward network using ReLU activations. 

2.3. Linear RNNs 

Going beyond classical RNNs, there has recently been inter-est in RNNs with linear state updates due to the advantages for parallelizing on the sequence dimension. These linear RNNs (LRNNs) can be defined as follows: 

Definition 4 (LRNN) . Given x1, . . . , xn ∈ Kd, an LRNN head computes a sequence of matrix valued states 

S1, . . . , Sn ∈ Kd×d via 

St = A(xt)St−1 + b(xt),

where A, b are arithmetic closed-form functions. Definition 4 leaves open the specific parameterization of 

A and b as a function of xt. The choice of parameteriza-tion is crucial for theoretical expressivity (Merrill et al., 2024) as well practical concerns like memory. For instance, constrained parameterizations (time-invariant or diagonal) were explored in early LRNNs, but these were shown to limit expressivity to TC 0 (Merrill et al., 2024). Since then, newer LRNNs have adopted richer parameterizations that are non-diagonal but still efficient. Two broad classes of “slightly non-diagonal” parameterizations are diagonal-plus-low-rank (DPLR) and permutation-diagonal (PD) LRNNS. 2  

> 2Henceforth, for brevity, we will write At,kt, etc. to mean

Definition 5 (DPLR) . An LRNN is DPLR if it satisfies 

At = Dt − k⊤ 

> t

vt, where Dt is diagonal, kt, vt are vectors, and all have an arithmetic closed form in terms of xt.In particular, we consider specific DPLR variants: • RWKV-7 (Peng et al., 2025): 

At = diag( wt) − λtκt(at ⊙ κt)⊤ bt = vt ˜k⊤ 

> t

,

for per-token vectors wt, at, κ t, vt, λ t, ˜kt ∈ Kd are produced from xt via linear projection. • DeltaNet (Yang et al., 2024): 

At = I − βtk⊤ 

> t

kt bt = vtk⊤ 

> t

,

where kt, vt, β t depend on xt via projection. A key difference between RWKV-7 and DeltaNet is that the state update is symmetric in DeltaNet. Related to this, Grazzi et al. (2025) show how, for fixed-precision DeltaNet, the range of βt is crucial for expressivity: restricting βt ∈

(0 , 1) prevents recognizes parity, but βt ∈ (0 , 2) allows it. Both architectures have recently been trained at large scale (Peng et al., 2025; Kimi et al., 2025). 

Definition 6 (PD; Terzic et al., 2025) . An LRNN is PD 

if it satisfies At = PtDt for permutation matrix Pt and diagonal Dt, both with an arithmetic closed form in terms of xt.

2.4. Multilayer RNNs 

In line with current practice (Yang et al., 2025), we will imagine that these RNN components (Sections 2.2 and 2.3, respectively) are used as “heads” within a larger architecture resembling the transformer. A head is computed by pass-ing x1, . . . , xn to each head; the specific parameterizations mentioned above will compute quantities resembling keys and values in the transformer. After this, the head output yt

is determined as to be ht in a nonlinear RNN and q⊤ 

> t

St−1

in an LRNN, where qt = Qx t is analogous to a query. The overall architecture of a multilayer RNN then works as follows. The first layer maps each token to an embedding. This is followed by alternating LRNN sublayers, which mix information across tokens, and feedforward sublayers, which apply local computation at each token. More formally, these sublayers have the form: 

Definition 7 (Multihead RNN Sublayer) . Given 

x1, . . . , xn ∈ Kd, we first apply layer-norm, com-pute heads y1, . . . , yh in parallel, and then aggregate the outputs. Formally, the sublayer computes the mapping 

xt 7 → xt + O · ⟨ y1, . . . , yh⟩.

Definition 8 (Feedforward Sublayer) . Given x1, . . . , xn ∈

Kd, we first apply layer-norm and then apply a standard    

> At(xt),kt(xt), etc., leaving the dependence on xtimplicit.

3Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

two-layer ReLU network. Letting ˜x = lnorm( x), the feed-forward sublayer computes xt 7 → xt + W · ReLU( U˜xt).A full LRNN network consists of serial composition of multihead LRNN and feedforward sublayers. 

Definition 9 (Language Recognition) . Given a datatype K,we define the language recognized by an LRNN as follows. For every string w ∈ Σn, we apply a linear transformation 

o to the final layer output yℓn at the last token and accept if and only if o⊤yℓn > 0.

Precision. Let f : Σ ∗ → Kd be a representation in a neural sequence model (e.g., a transformer or RNN). We can define the precision of this representation as follows: 

Definition 10. Let encode be the function that serializes each value in a vector x ∈ Kd in binary. The precision of 

f : Σ ∗ → Kd is pf (n) = max w∈Σn |encode( f (w)) |.We define the precision of an RNN as the maximum pre-cision over all components in its computation graph. By definition, all RNN over Q have a poly-size computation graph and hence at most poly-precision , i.e., pf (n) = O(nc)

for some c. Some RNNs attain log precision , i.e., satisfy 

pf (n) = O(log n). When talking about log-precision net-works, we will assume that log-precision variants of exp 

and √· are used in the computation graph, so that extra precision is not added to intermediate values needlessly. 

2.5. Circuit Complexity 

We will leverage circuit complexity (Vollmer, 1999) to for-malize the tradeoff between parallelizability and expres-sivity of RNNs. We first recall standard circuit complex-ity classes. NC d is the class of languages recognized by bounded-fan-in boolean circuits of polynomial size and depth O(log d n). Write NC for S 

> d≥0

NC d. AC d is the extension of NC d that allows unbounded fan in, and TC d

extends AC d by allowing majority (MAJ) gates in addition to AND, OR, and NOT. All of these circuit classes have variants with different levels of uniformity; unless otherwise specified, we work with first-order ( FO ) uniformity. See Strobl et al. (2024) for more background on these classes. We will focus on the bounded fan-in classes, which are more aligned with real hardware. The expressivity of transformers (Hao et al., 2022; Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023) and simple LRNNs like Mamba (Merrill et al., 2024) is upper bounded by TC 0, which is known to be contained in the log-depth class NC 1. This class is efficiently parallelizable in the sense that problems in it can be solved by an appropriate hardware implementation in time proportional to the depth of the corresponding circuits, i.e., in logarithmic wall-clock time. With today’s LLMs often trained for context lengths of 64K to 1M tokens, log-depth is proportional to 16 to 20. This is much more reasonably aligned with typical model depth of transformers and LRNNs than the log-squared depth of NC 2 circuits, which would grow proportional to 256 to 400. Even with a small constant factor, log-square depth would render the resulting computation significantly less parallelizable. We thus treat log-depth as the boundary of efficient parallelization .A more liberal notion of efficient parallelizability allows for arithmetic circuits instead of boolean ones. For our purpose, an arithmetic circuit is defined with respect to a ring (R, ⊕, ⊖, ⊗, 0, 1) . In particular, it uses gates that correspond to ⊕, ⊖, ⊗ : R × R → R. Such a circuit gives rise to a function f : Σ n → R, where n is the number of input nodes. Central to our results will be the class PNC 1, which cor-responds to the class of languages L for which there is a family C1 = {Cn}n≥0 of log-depth arithmetic circuits with 

Cn represents a function with n input nodes such that, for all w ∈ Σn, we have w ∈ L iff Cn(w) > 0 (positivity 

check). If we replace the positivity check Cn(w) > 0 with the zero or equality check Cn(w) = 0 , we obtain the class 

ENC 1.3 The following relations are known between these classes (assuming some level of uniformity for the circuit classes when compared with L or P): 

TC 0 ⊆ NC 1 ⊆ ENC 1 ⊆ PNC 1 ⊆ L

⊆ NC 2 ⊆ · · · ⊆ NC ⊆ P.

Whether these relations are proper is a long-standing open question in complexity theory (just as the question of P vs. 

NP ). That said, we will proceed as in complexity theory, namely, associate a neural model with one of the above complexity class by showing that it captures a complete problem in the class and is subsumed by the class .We note that PNC 1 is generally thought to be “just above” 

NC 1 in the sense that it can be simulated by NC circuits of depth O(log n log ∗ n).4 We will therefore think of the class PNC 1 as nearly as efficiently parallelizable as NC 1 in general and as transformers in particular. 

# 3. Parallelizability Limits of Nonlinear RNNs 

We start with a folklore upper bound on the expressivity of nonlinear RNNs (proof in Appendix A for completeness): 

Proposition 1 (Upper Bound) . Let M be an RNN over 

Q with s = O(poly( n)) precision. Then the language               

> 3While this class is often denoted as C=NC 1, we use the sim-plified notation ENC 1for succinctness.
> 4Mereghetti & Palano (2000) mention that the iterated matrix multiplication problem is in NC 1. However, they do not provide a proof or reference, and this turns out to be not quite accurate. The best known simulation of PNC 1by NC circuits recursively uses the Chinese Remainder Theorem and incurs a small overhead of
> O(log ∗n), requiring total depth O(log nlog ∗n)(Jung, 1985).

4Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

recognized by M is also recognizable by a Turing machine that uses O(max {s, log n}) space and poly( n) time. 

Corollary 1. Poly-precision RNNs can be simulated in P

and log-precision RNNs can be simulated in L.

This result gives a fully sequential simulation for poly-precision RNNs in P. On the other hand, since L ⊆ NC 2,log-precision nonlinear RNNs can be parallelized to depth 

O(log 2 n), incurring a factor of O(log n) in circuit depth compared to transformers. We will next show that both of these upper bounds are essentially tight, barring major breakthroughs in complexity theory. That is, poly-precision RNNs likely cannot be parallelized at all to poly-logarithmic depth, and, for log-precision RNNs, the O(log n) penalty relative to transformers likely cannot be removed. 

3.1. Poly-Precision Nonlinear RNNs Are P-Complete 

We first show that nonlinear RNNs with polynomial preci-sion can simulate Turing machines, taking inspiration from the classical construction of Siegelmann & Sontag (1995). It will follow that they can solve P-complete problems, which means they cannot be parallelized (to poly-log depth) un-less NC = P. Towards showing this, we prove that RNNs whose gating function is an MLP can simulate a multi-stack machine, which is Turing-complete (proof in Appendix A): 

Theorem 1 (Turing-Completeness) . For any multi-stack ma-chine M , there exists a one-layer MLP RNN that recognizes the same language as M .Proof sketch. The idea follows Siegelmann & Sontag (1995). We use a poly-precision scalar in the RNN state to represent each stack and leverage the fact that a ReLU network (used in the recurrence) can update the stack by pushing and popping. Since a multi-stack machine is Turing complete, it follows from Theorem 1 that poly-precision nonlinear RNNs can solve a P-complete problem (proof in Appendix A): 

Corollary 2 (P-Completeness) . There is a one-layer MLP RNN whose language is P-complete under FO reductions. 

It follows that, under standard complexity conjectures, poly-precision nonlinear RNNs cannot be parallelized effectively: 

Corollary 3 (Poly-Precision Depth Lower Bound) . If NC ̸ =

P, there is a nonlinear RNN that, for any k, cannot be simulated by an NC circuit family of depth O(log k n).

In Appendix H, we extend these results to input-dependent ReLU RNNs (rather than just for MLP RNNs). 

3.2. Log-Precision Nonlinear RNNs Are L-Complete 

We have established that poly-precision nonlinear RNNs cannot be parallelized effectively assuming NC ̸ = P. How-ever, in practice, LLMs use bounded precision, which moti-vates similarly analyzing nonlinear RNNs with log precision. Corollary 1 shows such RNNs are in L; we now show they can also solve an L-complete problem, establishing that they likely cannot be parallelized as effectively as transformers or linear RNNs under standard conjectures. Prior work (Merrill & Sabharwal, 2025b) has used the graph connectivity problem as a prototypical L-complete problem when analyzing models such as log-depth transformers. This problem, however, does not naturally lend to a left-to-right single-pass solution that would be suitable for formalizing the additional expressive power of nonlinear RNNs. To work around this hurdle, we consider the following sorted and 

deterministic variant of the problem where each graph node has exactly one outgoing edge and the nodes are presented in a topologically sorted order: 

Definition 11. Sorted deterministic graph connectivity is the problem that takes as input a source node s, sequence of directed edges (i1, j 1), . . . (in, j n), and target node t, all encoded in unary. The edges are deterministic — meaning that each i has at most one outgoing edge (i, j ) — and 

topologically sorted — meaning i1 < · · · < i n. The output is 1 if and only if there is a path of edges from s to t.Perhaps surprisingly, this simpler variant of deterministic graph connectivity remains L-complete: 

Proposition 2. Sorted deterministic graph connectivity is 

L-complete under FO -reductions. 

We defer the proof to Appendix A.2. Intuitively, this is achieved by reduction from deterministic (but not necessar-ily sorted) graph connectivity. The latter is well-known to be L-complete (cf. Jones, 1975; Cook & McKenzie, 1987; Sipser, 1997), and is in fact also complete under 

FO -reductions just like the general graph connectivity prob-lem (Immerman, 1998). The reduction makes O(n) copies of the deterministic graph and connects the i-th copy to 

(i + 1) -st copy. In this way, the resulting deterministic graph is polynomial in the size of the original graph and at the same time topologically sorted. The topological sortedness condition allows a logspace ma-chine to solve the sorted deterministic graph connectivity problem by reading the graph in one direction (from left to right). This is also the reason that a single-layer nonlinear RNN can solve the sorted deterministic graph connectiv-ity problem. Since the indices of the vertices (given in unary) can be encoded in binary with O(log n) bits, nonlin-ear RNNs can solve this problem with only log precision. 

Theorem 2 (L-Complete) . There exists a one-layer log-precision MLP RNN that solves sorted deterministic graph connectivity, an L-complete problem. Proof sketch. The proof leverages the computational model 5Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

of counter machines (Fischer et al., 1968; Weiss et al., 2018; Merrill, 2021), a generalization of finite automata augmented with a fixed number of integer-valued registers that has been heavily used to analyze RNNs (Weiss et al., 2018; Merrill, 2019). Lemma 2 shows a counter machine can solve sorted deterministic graph connectivity. Moreover, Lemma 3 shows a log-precision MLP RNN can simulate a counter machine. 5 Thus, we conclude that an MLP RNN can also solve sorted deterministic graph connectivity. It is a longstanding open problem (Allender, 2023) if any 

L-complete problem has a boolean circuit family of depth 

o(log 2 n). Thus, we have: 

Corollary 4 (Log-Precision Parallelism Limit) . If log-precision nonlinear RNNs can be simulated by an NC circuit family of o(log 2 n) depth, then L admits an NC circuit fam-ily of o(log 2 n) depth. 

Corollary 4 relates to recent work on parallelizing nonlin-ear RNNs via Newton’s method, i.e., exactly computing the nonlinear RNN through iterated linear approximation (Danieli et al., 2025; Anonymous, 2025b). Gonzalez et al. (2025) show that this method runs in time O(log 2 n) for predictable dynamical systems, matching our theoretical expectation for parallel runtime of nonlinear RNNs. 

# 4. Simulating LRNNs with Parallel Circuits 

Having established the limits of parallelizing nonlinear RNNs, we turn to understanding the degree to which linear RNNs can be parallelized and, conversely, their limitations for expressing inherently sequential computation. Prior theo-retical work has also studied the expressivity of linear RNNs from a circuit complexity perspective, revealing expressivity advantages of some linear RNNs over transformers (Mer-rill et al., 2024). In particular, whereas linear RNNs with simple parameterizations like S4 and Mamba fall into TC 0,the same complexity class as transformers, more complex parameterizations like DeltaNet (Grazzi et al., 2025) and RWKV (Peng et al., 2025) can express NC 1-complete fi-nite state tracking problems. This past work suggests a key advantage of well-parameterized linear RNN architectures over transformers, but leaves open a precise understanding of whether this additional expressivity implies drawbacks in parallelism, i.e, additional overhead in the sequential run-time required to simulate LRNNs relative to transformers. Transformers only compute functions in TC 0, which implies they can be simulated by NC 1 circuits of depth O(log n). It is known that linear RNNs can be parallelized to near log depth using the parallel SCAN algorithm (Blelloch, 1990), 

> 5While counter machines have been leveraged extensively to analyze RNNs in the past (Weiss et al., 2018; Merrill et al., 2020), Lemma 3 is novel and interesting in its own right.

but this does not immediately yield a circuit complexity characterization comparable to that of transformers. We address this gap by showing that all linear RNNs, indepen-dent of parameterization details, can be simulated in the complexity class PNC 1 of bounded fan-in log-depth circuits with arithmetic gates (proof in Appendix B): 

Theorem 3 (LRNN Upper Bound) . The language recog-nized by any LRNN over Q is in PNC 1.

Theorem 3 applies generally to LRNNs over Q (i.e., poly-precision LRNNs). For the subclass of log-precision LRNNs, it is in fact possible to obtain a tighter charac-terization. Let AC 0[ENC 1] denote languages that can be solved by boolean AC 0 circuits that can make use (as a blackbox) of any boolean circuit that comes from an ENC 1-arithmetic circuit. It is known (cf. Datta et al., 2012) that 

ENC 1 ⊆ AC 0[ENC 1] ⊆ PNC 1. We show in Appendix B: 

Theorem 4 (Log-Precision LRNN Upper Bound) . The lan-guage recognized by any log-precision LRNN over Q is in 

AC 0[ENC 1].

As noted in Section 2.5, PNC 1 can be simulated by 

O(log n log ∗ n) depth NC circuits. We therefore have: 

Corollary 5. The language recognized by any LRNN over 

Q is also recognized by an NC circuit family of depth 

O(log n log ∗ n).

It follows that LRNNs are nearly as efficiently paralleliz-able on hardware as transformers, paying only an O(log ∗ n)

depth penalty beyond the O(log n) depth needed to imple-ment transformers with NC circuits. On the other hand, we will show next that well-parameterized LRNNs significantly gain (over transformers) on the side of expressivity. As a by-product of our above results, we also obtain the following boundary between linear RNNs and nonlinear RNNs. Recall that (sorted, deterministic) graph connectivity problem is L-complete. 

Corollary 6. Assuming L does not admit NC circuits of depth O(log n log ∗ n), LRNNs over Q cannot solve (sorted, deterministic) graph connectivity, while nonlinear RNNs can. 

It is only known that L ⊆ NC 2. It is still a long-standing open problem (Allender, 2023) whether any L-complete problem admits NC circuits with depth o(log 2 n).

# 5. Expressivity Differences Between LRNNs 

In Section 4, we showed that all linear RNNs can only solve problems in PNC 1. A natural question is whether this upper bound is tight, i.e., whether each linear RNN variant can solve hard problems in PNC 1. For some variants like S4 and Mamba, we already know a tighter upper bound of TC 0

6Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

can be given (Merrill et al., 2024), meaning these architec-tures do not achieve full expressivity in PNC 1. However, several newer LRNN parameterizations of LRNNs that can express NC 1-complete problems have been proposed: in particular several flavors of DLPR LRNNs as well as PD LRNNs (Section 2.3). We now analyze the expressivity of these differents parameterizations, showing a conditional separation. In particular, while DPLR LRNNs attain PNC 1-complete expressivity, we can show that PD LRNNs are contained within NC 1.

5.1. DPLR LRNNs are PNC 1-Complete 

Two common popular DPLR LRNNs are RWKV-7 (Peng et al., 2025) and DeltaNet (Schlag et al., 2021). We will show both of these architectures can solve PNC 1-complete problems, achieving the upper bound on LRNN expressivity from Section 4. We begin by defining a PNC 1-complete problem, namely iterated matrix multiplication :

Definition 12 (Iterated 3 × 3 Matrix Multiplication) . The input is a token stream of length 9n over {− 1, 0, 1}, par-titioned into n consecutive blocks of length 9. Block t

encodes a matrix At ∈ K3×3. The iterated matrix multipli-cation problem is to compute Pn = Qnt=1 At ∈ Z3×3.

Proposition 3 (Caussinus et al., 1998, Corollary 3.4) . The 

3 × 3 iterated multiplication problem is GapNC 1-complete under FO reductions, and thus checking if the (0 , 0) entry of Pn is positive is PNC 1 complete under FO reductions. 

We show RWKV-7 and DeltaNet can express this iterated matrix multiplication problem, establishing that they can solve PNC 1-complete problems: 

Theorem 5 (DPLR PNC 1-Completeness) . There exist a 

4-layer RWKV-7 and a 4-layer DeltaNet that solves the iter-ated 3 × 3 matrix multiplication problem and, in particular, checks if the (0 , 0) entry of Pn is positive. Proof sketch. For a full proof, see Appendix C.3 for RWKV-7 and Appendix C.5 for DeltaNet. The goal is to multiple a sequence of arbitrary matrices, but we are constrained to applying DPLR transition matrices. To get around this, we generalize an idea from Peng et al. (2025): use layers 1–3 to factor blocks of arbitrary matrices into DPLR matrices with the same product, and then multiply all of these DPLR matrices to get the overall product Pn.Theorem 5 shows that RWKV-7 and DeltaNet, two DPLR LRNNs, can indeed solve a PNC 1-complete problem, pro-viding a lower bound on their expressivity that matches the upper bound from Theorem 3. This however leaves open the possibility that even such LRNNs may not be able to solve much simpler problems within PNC 1. To address this gap, we extend the argument to also derive a more general lower bound , stating that RWKV-7 can, in fact, solve every prob-lem solvable by a Weighted Finite Automaton (WFA) over the semiring Z (WFA; see Definition 13 for a definition). WFA subsume the problem of iterated 3-by-3 matrix multi-plications with matrices over {− 1, 0, 1}, which we already remarked (see Exercise 5.10 of Vollmer, 1999 and Caussinus et al., 1998) to be GapNC 1-complete. In other words, the set of functions f : Σ ∗ → Z definable by WFAs contains a 

GapNC 1-complete problem. Thus, considering “acceptance” by a WFA of an input string w with the condition f (w) > 0,there is a PNC 1-complete WFA language. 

Theorem 6 (DPLR WFA Simulation) . For any n-state WFA 

A over Q, there exist a 4-layer RWKV-7 and a 4-layer DeltaNet that both compute fA(w).

A proof sketch and details are deferred to Appendix C.2 for RWKV-7 and to Appendix C.4 for DeltaNet. 

5.2. PD LRNNs are NC 1-Complete 

PD LRNNs are another recently proposed LRNN variant that can succintly represent the NC 1-complete state track-ing problem (Terzic et al., 2025). We analyze the expres-sive power, showing that, in contrast to DPLR LRNNs, PD LRNNs are constrained to NC 1 (proof in Appendix D): 

Theorem 7. Let M be a multi-layer PD LRNN over Q.Then the language recognized by M is in FO -uniform NC 1.

Theorem 7 establishes a conditional expressivity gap be-tween DPLR and PD LRNNs: while DPLR architec-tures like DeltaNet and RWKV-7 can express some PNC 1-complete problems, PD LRNNs are restricted to NC 1. More-over, since it has previously been shown that PD LRNNs can recognize regular languages (Terzic et al., 2025), we see that they can solve NC 1-complete problems as well. In the one-layer case, it is possible to give an exact equiva-lence between PD-SSMs and deterministic WFAs: 

Theorem 8. One-layer PD LRNNs over Q recognize the same languages as deterministic WFAs. 

See Appendix E.2 for a proof. It follows from Theorems 7 and 8 that any deterministic WFA can be simulated in NC 1,and there exist some for which simulation is NC 1-complete: 

Corollary 7. Any deterministic WFA can be simulated in 

NC 1. Moreover, there exists a deterministic WFA that rec-ognizes an NC 1-complete language. 

# 6. Experiments 

We have provided a concise theoretical characterization of the expressive strengths and limitations of (non)linear RNNs. We now empirically evaluate the learnable capacity of recur-rent models on the Deterministic Graph Connectivity and 7Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable?                                

> RNN RWKV-7 DeltaNet Mamba Transformer
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Accuracy(%)
> (a) Sorted Deterministic Graph Connectivity
> RNN RWKV-7 DeltaNet Mamba Transformer
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Accuracy(%)
> (b) Matrix Multiplication over Zm
> RNN RWKV-7 DeltaNet Mamba Transformer
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Accuracy(%)
> (c) Unbounded Matrix Multiplication
> [1,100] [101,200] [201,300]
> Figure 2. Accuracy across size/length ranges. (a) Deterministic graph connectivity over graph-size ranges. (b) Iterated 3×3matrix multiplication over Zm. (c) Iterated 3×3matrix multiplication over Z. Models are evaluated on in-distribution ranges [1 ,100]
> and out-of-distribution ranges [101 ,200] and [201 ,300] .

Iterated 3 × 3 Matrix Multiplication. Specifically, we com-pare nonlinear RNNs with linear RNN models (DeltaNet and RWKV-7), the linear RNN variant Mamba, and include Transformers as an additional baseline. 

Experimental Setup. To better evaluate learning capacity, we construct balanced datasets with length generalization. The train set contains 70K samples uniformly drawn from 

N ∈ [1 , 100] and the validation set contains 20K samples drawn from the same range. We evaluated on three test splits, each containing 10K samples, drawn from [1 , 100] ,

[101 , 200] , and [201 , 300] . Here, N denotes the number of nodes in the graph task and the size of the matrix in the matrix multiplication task. We used the nonlinear RNN and transformer (Sarrof et al., 2024), and linear models from Yang & Zhang (2024). All models are trained using the BCEWithLogitsLoss function. All models are trained using AdamW with learning rate 

1e−4 and weight decay 10 −4, batch size 64, gradient clip-ping at norm 1.0, and early stopping either when the ac-curacy of the in-distribution data reaches 100% for three consecutive evaluations or when a maximum of 60K train-ing steps are reached. Full benchmark details and training configurations are provided in the Appendix. 

Sorted Deterministic Graph Connectivity. As shown in Figure 2 (a), all models achieve high in-distribution ac-curacy, indicating that sorted deterministic graph connec-tivity is learnable under matched training and test lengths. However, performance diverges markedly under length ex-trapolation. The nonlinear RNN maintains near-perfect accuracy across all bins, demonstrating strong length gener-alization. In contrast, Transformer, RWKV-7, Mamba, and DeltaNet exhibit substantial degradation as graph size in-creases, despite competitive performance. These results highlight the importance of recurrent inductive bias for length-generalizable algorithmic reasoning. 

Iterated Matrix Multiplication. RWKV-7, the nonlin-ear RNN, and DeltaNet achieve near-perfect accuracy on the in-distribution data and degrade only moderately on the longer out-of-distribution sequences in (b). In contrast, Transformer and Mamba perform poorly across all lengths, suggesting limited capacity to capture the underlying alge-braic structure even within the training regime. Architec-tural differences are more pronounced in the non-modular (c). RWKV-7, the nonlinear RNN, and DeltaNet retain perfect or near-perfect accuracy across both in-distribution and out-of-distribution lengths, despite unbounded integer growth. Mamba improves with increasing sequence length but remains substantially below the top-performing models, while the Transformer degrades sharply beyond training lengths. Overall, these results indicate that architectures with explicit recurrence or state-space structure are substan-tially better suited for iterated linear-algebraic computations than standard attention-based Transformers. 

# 7. Conclusion 

We have given a comprehensive characterization of the ex-pressive power and parallelizability of different RNNs and LRNNs. First, we reveal fundamental expressivity gaps between linear and nonlinear RNNs, highlighting the deter-ministic graph connectivity problem as a simple separator. This circuit complexity perspective refines an older line of work on rational recurrences (Peng et al., 2018; Merrill et al., 2020), formalizing a fundamental tradeoff between the expressivity of the state update and the parallelizability of an RNN. Second, we compare the expressivity of dif-ferent types of linear RNN. Whereas both PD and DPLR parameterizations have been shown to be capable of regular language recognition in prior work, our theory reveals fine-grained differences between these variants, with PD being 

NC 1-complete while DPLR LRNNs are PNC 1-complete. Experiments agree with our theoretical predictions about the expressivity differences between nonlinear RNNs and 8Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

LRNNs and different LRNN variants. In light of the fact that linear RNNs have recently seen larger scale practical adoption (e.g., Kimi et al., 2025), we hope our theoretical characterizations can guide architecture design to achieve an effective balance between expressivity and parallelism. 

# Impact Statement 

This paper presents foundational work whose goal is to advance the field of machine learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

# Acknowledgments 

WM thanks Mehryar Mohri for insightful discussions re-lated to RNNs and WFAs and Brian Kitano for finding an issue in an early draft. 

# References 

Allender, E. Discussion on parallelizing logspace problems. 

https://cstheory.stackexchange.com/q uestions/52459/what-circuit-depth-i s-enough-to-compute-a-log-space-com plete-problem , 2023. [Online; accessed 27 Jan 2026]. Allender, E., Krebs, A., and McKenzie, P. Better com-plexity bounds for cost register automata. In Larsen, K. G., Bodlaender, H. L., and Raskin, J. (eds.), 42nd International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, MFCS 2017, Aalborg, Denmark, August 21-25, 2017 , volume 83 of LIPIcs , pp. 24:1–24:14. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum f ¨ur Informatik, 2017. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.MFCS.2017.24. URL https: //doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2017.24 .Anonymous. The transformer cookbook. Submitted to Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= sPshCSvDrX . Under review. Anonymous. A unifying framework for parallelizing sequen-tial models with linear dynamical systems. Submitted to Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= fw6GgAIGur . Under review. Arora, S., Eyuboglu, S., Zhang, M., Timalsina, A., Alberti, S., Zou, J., Rudra, A., and Re, C. Simple linear attention language models balance the recall-throughput tradeoff. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Mathematical and Empirical Understanding of Foundation Models , 2024. URL http s://openreview.net/forum?id=qRlcoPhE oD .Beck, M., P ¨oppel, K., Spanring, M., Auer, A., Prudnikova, O., Kopp, M. K., Klambauer, G., Brandstetter, J., and Hochreiter, S. xLSTM: Extended long short-term mem-ory. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=ARAxPPIAhq .Blelloch, G. E. Prefix sums and their applications. Technical Report CMU-CS-90-190, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, November 1990. Bradbury, J., Merity, S., Xiong, C., and Socher, R. Quasi-recurrent neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. URL https://op enreview.net/forum?id=H1zJ-v5xl .Carlyle, J. W. and Paz, A. Realizations by stochastic finite automata. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 5 (1):26–40, 1971. Caussinus, H., McKenzie, P., Th ´erien, D., and Vollmer, H. Nondeterministicnc1computation. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 57(2):200–212, 1998. ISSN 0022-0000. doi: https://doi.org/10.1006/jcss.1998.1588. URL 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/scienc e/article/pii/S0022000098915884 .Chiang, D. Transformers in uniform TC$ˆ0$. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= ZA7D4nQuQF .Cook, S. A. and McKenzie, P. Problems complete for de-terministic logarithmic space. Journal of Algorithms , 8 (5):385–394, September 1987. ISSN 0196-6774. doi: 10.1016/0196-6774(87)90018-6. URL https://doi. org/10.1016/0196-6774(87)90018-6 .Danieli, F., Rodriguez, P., Sarabia, M., Suau, X., and Zappella, L. Pararnn: Unlocking parallel training of nonlinear rnns for large language models, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.21450 .Datta, S., Mahajan, M., Rao, B. V. R., Thomas, M., and Vollmer, H. Counting classes and the fine structure be-tween nc 1 and L. Theor. Comput. Sci. , 417:36–49, 2012. doi: 10.1016/J.TCS.2011.05.050. URL https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2011.05.050 .Elman, J. L. Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science ,14(2):179–211, 1990. doi: https://doi.org/10.1207/s155 16709cog1402 \ 1. URL https://onlinelibrar y.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1207/s1551670 9cog1402_1 .Fischer, P. C., Meyer, A. R., and Rosenberg, A. L. Counter machines and counter languages. Mathematical systems 

9Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

theory , 2:265–283, 1968. URL https://api.sema nticscholar.org/CorpusID:13006433 .Gonzalez, X., Kozachkov, L., Zoltowski, D. M., Clark-son, K. L., and Linderman, S. Predictability enables parallelization of nonlinear state space models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. URL https://openrevi ew.net/forum?id=7AGXSlXcK6 .Grazzi, R., Siems, J., Franke, J. K., Zela, A., Hutter, F., and Pontil, M. Unlocking state-tracking in linear RNNs through negative eigenvalues. In The Thirteenth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= UvTo3tVBk2 .Gu, A. and Dao, T. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces, 2024. URL https://op enreview.net/forum?id=AL1fq05o7H .Hao, Y., Angluin, D., and Frank, R. Formal language recog-nition by hard attention transformers: Perspectives from circuit complexity. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics ,10:800–810, 2022. Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory. 

Neural Comput. , 9(8):1735–1780, November 1997. ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8. 1735 .Immerman, N. Descriptive Complexity . Springer Verlag, 1998. Jones, N. D. Space-bounded reducibility among combina-torial problems. Journal of Computer and System Sci-ences , 11(1):68–85, August 1975. ISSN 0022-0000. doi: 10.1016/S0022-0000(75)80050-X. URL https://do i.org/10.1016/S0022-0000(75)80050-X .Jung, H. Depth efficient transformations of arithmetic into boolean circuits. In Proceedings of Fundamentals of Computation Theory . Springer, 1985. doi: 10.1007/BF b0028801. URL https://link.springer.com/ chapter/10.1007/BFb0028801 .Katharopoulos, A., Vyas, A., Pappas, N., and Fleuret, F. Transformers are rnns: fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention. In Proceedings of the 37th Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’20. JMLR.org, 2020. Kimi, Zhang, Y., Lin, Z., Yao, X., Hu, J., Meng, F., Liu, C., Men, X., Yang, S., Li, Z., Li, W., Lu, E., Liu, W., Chen, Y., Xu, W., Yu, L., Wang, Y., Fan, Y., Zhong, L., Yuan, E., Zhang, D., Zhang, Y., Liu, T. Y., Wang, H., Fang, S., He, W., Liu, S., Li, Y., Su, J., Qiu, J., Pang, B., Yan, J., Jiang, Z., Huang, W., Yin, B., You, J., Wei, C., Wang, Z., Hong, C., Chen, Y., Chen, G., Wang, Y., Zheng, H., Wang, F., Liu, Y., Dong, M., Zhang, Z., Pan, S., Wu, W., Wu, Y., Guan, L., Tao, J., Fu, G., Xu, X., Wang, Y., Lai, G., Wu, Y., Zhou, X., Yang, Z., and Du, Y. Kimi linear: An expressive, efficient attention architecture, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26692 .Mereghetti, C. and Palano, B. Threshold circuits for iter-ated matrix product and powering. RAIRO - Theoretical Informatics and Applications , 34(1):39–46, 2000. doi: 10.1051/ita:2000105. Merrill, W. Sequential neural networks as automata. In Eis-ner, J., Gall ´e, M., Heinz, J., Quattoni, A., and Rabusseau, G. (eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on Deep Learn-ing and Formal Languages: Building Bridges , pp. 1– 13, Florence, August 2019. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-3901. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/W19-3901/ .Merrill, W. On the linguistic capacity of real-time counter automata, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2004.06866 .Merrill, W. and Sabharwal, A. The parallelism tradeoff: Limitations of log-precision transformers. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 11:531– 545, 2023. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00562. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2023.tacl-1.31/ .Merrill, W. and Sabharwal, A. Exact expressive power of transformers with padding. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,2025a. URL https://openreview.net/forum ?id=O1abxStFcy .Merrill, W. and Sabharwal, A. A little depth goes a long way: The expressive power of log-depth transformers. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025b. URL https://openre view.net/forum?id=5pHfYe10iX .Merrill, W., Weiss, G., Goldberg, Y., Schwartz, R., Smith, N. A., and Yahav, E. A formal hierarchy of RNN architec-tures. In Jurafsky, D., Chai, J., Schluter, N., and Tetreault, J. (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pp. 443–459, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.43. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-mai n.43/ .Merrill, W., Petty, J., and Sabharwal, A. The illusion of state in state-space models. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=QZgo9JZpLq .10 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

Peng, B., Zhang, R., Goldstein, D., Alcaide, E., Du, X., Hou, H., Lin, J., Liu, J., Lu, J., Merrill, W., Song, G., Tan, K., Utpala, S., Wilce, N., Wind, J. S., Wu, T., Wut-tke, D., and Zhou-Zheng, C. RWKV-7 ”goose” with expressive dynamic state evolution. In Second Con-ference on Language Modeling , 2025. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=ayB1PACN5j .Peng, H., Schwartz, R., Thomson, S., and Smith, N. A. Rational recurrences. In Riloff, E., Chiang, D., Hock-enmaier, J., and Tsujii, J. (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pp. 1203–1214, Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18- 1152. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/D18-1152/ .Sarrof, Y., Veitsman, Y., and Hahn, M. The expressive capac-ity of state space models: a formal language perspective. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’24, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9798331314385. Schlag, I., Irie, K., and Schmidhuber, J. Linear transformers are secretly fast weight programmers. In Meila, M. and Zhang, T. (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 139 of Pro-ceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 9355–9366. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedi ngs.mlr.press/v139/schlag21a.html .Siegelmann, H. and Sontag, E. On the computational power of neural nets. Journal of Computer and System Sciences ,50(1):132–150, 1995. ISSN 0022-0000. doi: https: //doi.org/10.1006/jcss.1995.1013. URL https://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pi i/S0022000085710136 .Sipser, M. Introduction to the Theory of Computation . PWS Publishing Company, 1997. Strobl, L., Merrill, W., Weiss, G., Chiang, D., and An-gluin, D. What formal languages can transformers express? a survey. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:543–561, 2024. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00663. URL https://aclantholo gy.org/2024.tacl-1.30/ .Terzic, A., Menet, N., Hersche, M., Hofmann, T., and Rahimi, A. Structured sparse transition matrices to enable state tracking in state-space models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. URL https://openreview.net /forum?id=RDbuSCWhad .Vollmer, H. Introduction to Circuit Complexity . Springer, 1999. Weiss, G., Goldberg, Y., and Yahav, E. On the practical computational power of finite precision rnns for language recognition, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/ab s/1805.04908 .Yang, S. and Zhang, Y. FLA: A triton-based library for hardware-efficient implementations of linear attention mechanism, January 2024. URL https://github .com/fla-org/flash-linear-attention .Yang, S., Wang, B., Zhang, Y., Shen, Y., and Kim, Y. Par-allelizing linear transformers with the delta rule over se-quence length. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=y8Rm 4VNRPH .Yang, S., Kautz, J., and Hatamizadeh, A. Gated delta net-works: Improving mamba2 with delta rule, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.06464 .11 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

# A. Nonlinear RNNs 

Proposition 1 (Upper Bound) . Let M be an RNN over Q with s = O(poly( n)) precision. Then the language recognized by 

M is also recognizable by a Turing machine that uses O(max {s, log n}) space and poly( n) time. Proof. Given a log-precision RNN of depth d, we will simulate it left-to-right using a Turing machine T . Let s′ =max {s, log n}. At each step t, for each layer, T stores the hidden state ht at that layer using s bits. Given ht−1 and input xt, by Lemma 1, ht can be computed in FO -uniform TC 0, which is contained in L. Thus, T can compute ht using 

O(max {s, log n}) space 6 and poly( n) time. This space can be reused for computing ht+1 , ht+2 , etc. Overall, the Turing machine uses d · O(max {s, log n}) bits of storage space and runs in poly( n) time, as desired. 

A.1. Polynomial Precision Theorem 1 (Turing-Completeness) . For any multi-stack machine M , there exists a one-layer MLP RNN that recognizes the same language as M .Proof. The idea is the same as the proof of Lemma 3, except that we will simulate an automaton with stacks of binary values rather than counters. The stacks allow update operations push 0, push 1, pop , and noop . Additionally, it has a head ,which is the top element. We view each stack s as a positive number s ∈ [0 , 2] that starts off as s = 1 and is modified using the following update operations: 

head (s) = 1[s ≥ 1] 

push v (s) = v + 12 s

pop (s) = 

(

2( s − head (s)) if s̸ = 1 

noop (s) otherwise 

noop (s) = s. 

Moreover, we will let st ∈ [0 , 2] k denote the vector of stacks at time t. The update operation ut ∈ { head , push , pop , noop }

is determined via a finite lookup table u as a function of qt, σt, and head (st). The state transition δ depends on the same inputs. The implementation of these operations with a ReLU network follows the same idea as the proof of Lemma 3. We first construct a ReLU network to compute head (s) from s as a threshold with ϵ = 1 /3 (Anonymous, 2025a, Section 4.7). Next, we compute qt = δ(qt−1, σ t, head (st)) and ut = u(qt−1, σ t, head (st−1)) as finite lookup tables (Anonymous, 2025a, Section 4.8). At this point, we have the correct next state, and it just remains to be shown that we can update the stacks. Let 

pop 1(s) = 2 s − 2 and pop 0(s) = 2 s. We compute the possible updated stacks push v (st−1), pop v (st−1), and noop (st−1)

with parallel ReLU networks, using the fact that each is a linear function. For each stack [st]i, we then compute its new value from these u(st−1)’s using a selector gadget based on [ut]i, head (st−1)i, and whether s = 1 (Anonymous, 2025a, Section 4.9). Thus, we can correctly compute qt and st at each step. 

Corollary 2 (P-Completeness) . There is a one-layer MLP RNN whose language is P-complete under FO reductions. Proof. Let L be any P-complete language under FO reductions. By construction L can be recognized by a poly-time Turing machine and thus also by a multi-stack machine running in time O(nc) for some c. Define a new padded language 

L′ = {w□|w|c

| w ∈ L}. Then L′ is P-complete and can be solved by a multi-stack machine, and thus also by an MLP RNN by Theorem 1. 

A.2. Logarithmic Precision Proposition 2. Sorted deterministic graph connectivity is L-complete under FO -reductions. Proof. We describe a simple FO reduction from deterministic (but not necessarily sorted) graph connectivity. The latter is well-known to be L-complete (cf. Jones, 1975; Cook & McKenzie, 1987; Sipser, 1997), and is in fact also complete under        

> 6Here log nspace is for intermediate computation of the Lmachine, and sspace is for its output.

12 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

FO -reductions just like the general graph connectivity problem (Immerman, 1998). We are given a deterministic graph G

with source s = 1 , target t = n, and edges 

(i1, j 1), . . . , (im, j m)

with ik, j k ∈ { 1, . . . , n }, for each k = 1 , . . . , m , and i1 = s and jm = t = n. We create a new deterministic graph G′ with edges 

(i1 + hn, j 1 + ( h + 1) n), . . . , (im + hn, j m + ( h + 1) n)

for each h = 0 , . . . , m − 1. We also add an additional node vF = nm + 1 and edges (n + hn, v F ). Note that n has no outgoing edge in G, so G′ remains deterministic. That is, v0, . . . , v s is a path in G iff v0, v 1 + n, v 2 + 2 n, . . . , v s + sn is a path in G′. Thus, t is reachable from s in G iff vF is reachable from s in G′.The above reduction can easily be seen to be implementable by a logspace-uniform AC 0 reduction. The values hn (for each 

h = 1 , . . . , m ) can be precomputed by a logspace machine since this depends only on the input size (more precisely, one can enumerate enough of hn for up to m = O(n)). The AC 0 circuit simply needs to perform simple additions. 

Theorem 2 (L-Complete) . There exists a one-layer log-precision MLP RNN that solves sorted deterministic graph connectivity, an L-complete problem. 

Our proof of this theorem will leverage the computational model of counter machines (CMs; Fischer et al., 1968; Weiss et al., 2018; Merrill, 2021). Also called counter automata, CMs are a generalization of finite automata augmented with a fixed number of integer-valued registers. CMs been heavily used to analyze the expressive power of RNNs (Weiss et al., 2018; Merrill, 2019). Lemma 2 shows a counter machine can solve sorted deterministic graph connectivity. Moreover, Lemma 3 shows a log-precision RNN with a ReLU MLP gating function can simulate a counter machine. Thus, we conclude that a log-precision RNN with ReLU MLP gating can also solve sorted deterministic graph connectivity. 

Lemma 2. Sorted deterministic graph connectivity can be solved by counter machine. Proof. Fix a unary encoding of an instance 

(s, (i1, j 1), . . . , (in, j n), t )

with separators between s, each im, each jm, and t. We assume that vertices are numbered in a topological order and encoded in unary by their numbers, so for every edge (im, j m) we have jm ≥ im. The machine uses three counters S, I, T 

and O(1) states to maintain the invariant that, after k edges, S encodes the furthest state reachable from s.The first step is to process the initial block 0s. The machine starts in a state qs and increments S on each symbol (leaving 

I, T at 0), so after this block S = s.We next enter a state qedge and process each edge (im, j m) in turn, maintaining the invariant that after m edges we have 

S = sm (the node reached from s after the first m edges) and I = 0 . For edge (im, j m), in a state qi the machine reads the unary block 0im and on each symbol performs 

S ← S − 1, I ← I + 1 .

At the following separator it tests whether S = 0 using the zero-mask. If S = 0 (i.e. sm−1 = im), it moves to a state q=

> j

and on each symbol of the jm-block simply does S ← S + 1 (leaving I unchanged); since S starts at 0, after 0jm we have 

S = jm, and at the next separator it resets I ← 0 and returns to qedge , so sm = jm. If instead S̸ = 0 , the machine moves to a state q̸ = 

> j

. On each symbol of the jm-block it now performs 

S ← S + 1 , I ← I − 1 if I̸ = 0 , and does nothing if I = 0 ,

where the choice again uses only the zero-mask bit of I. Initially I = im, so after min {im, j m} symbols we have added that many units back to S and subtracted them from I. Because jm ≥ im, by the end of the jm-block we have I = 0 and 

S = ( sm−1 − im) + im = sm−1,

and at the next separator we return to qedge with S = sm = sm−1 and I = 0 . Thus the invariant is preserved across every edge. 13 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

After the last edge the machine enters a state qt with S = sn and I = 0 . On the target block 0t it updates 

S ← S − 1, T ← T + 1 

on each symbol, so at the end S = sn − t. On the end-of-input marker it moves to an accepting state iff the zero-mask bit of 

S is 0, i.e. iff S = 0 , which is equivalent to sn = t.

Lemma 3. Let M be a real-time counter machine. There exists a one-layer MLP RNN with log precision that recognizes the same language as M .Proof. We divide partition the hidden state ht into three parts: st, which encodes a finite state as a one-hot vector, c+ 

> t

, which encodes the value of positive counters, and c− 

> t

, which encodes the absolute value of negative counters. Define qt as the state encoded by st and ct = c+ 

> t

− c− 

> t

. We will show how to construct an MLP f such that, applying ht = f (ht−1, x t), we will have st, c + 

> t

, c − 

> t

such that 

qt = δ(qt−1, σ t, z (ct−1)) 

ct = u(qt−1, σ t, z (ct−1))( ct−1).

We first construct a ReLU network to compute z(ct−1) as a function of c+ 

> t−1

and c− 

> t−1

using the standard construction for equality checks with a tolerance of ϵ = 1 /3 (Anonymous, 2025a, Section 4.7). We then construct ReLU networks to compute 

δ and u (with output encoded as one-hot vectors) given qt−1, σ t, z (ct−1), which is possible since both are finite lookup tables (Anonymous, 2025a, Section 4.8). We compute z with δ to get a one-hot encoding of qt = δ(qt−1, σ t, z (ct−1)) ,i.e., our updated state vector st. Similarly, we compose z with u to get a one-hot encoding of the update function 

ut = u(qt−1, σ t, z (ct−1)) to apply to the counters. The new values of c+ 

> t

and c− 

> t

can be obtained by a ReLU network that computes several continuous piecewise-linear functions of c+

> t−1

, c − 

> t−1

in parallel for different updates u ∈ {× 0, +0 , +1 , −1}

(Anonymous, 2025a, Section 4.1) and then applies a conditional selector for u = ut (Anonymous, 2025a, Section 4.9). We can then accept or reject a string of length n based on sn, c + 

> n

, c − 

> n

using an MLP. The construction uses log precision because qt is in a finite set and c+ 

> t

, c − 

> t

= O(n) .

# B. Expressivity Upper Bounds on LRNNs 

Theorem 3 (LRNN Upper Bound) . The language recognized by any LRNN over Q is in PNC 1.Proof. Since FO -uniform PNC 1 is closed under finite composition (Merrill & Sabharwal, 2025a, Proposition 3), the proof proceeds by simulating each component in the network in FO -uniform PNC 1.As a building block, we need gates that take as input bit representations for (s, t ) and output the integer-pair representation 

(s, t ) for the rational number s/t . This can be done by an FO -uniform poly-sized log-depth arithmetic Z-circuit (here, the measurement is with respect to the number of bits of s and t), as follows: if s is represented by bn−1 . . . b 0 ∈ { 0, 1}∗, then 

s = Pn−1 

> i=0

bi · 2i. Iterated sum, fast exponentiation, and multiplication by a constant can all be done by a uniform arithmetic 

Z-circuit with depth O(log n) and size polynomial in n.Next, we write the output in a convolutional form (Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023; Merrill et al., 2024): 

yt = xt +

> i

X

> j=0

q⊤

> t
> j

Y

> k=0

A(xj−k)

!

b(xi−j ).

By Lemma 1, there is an FO -uniform TC 0, and hence NC 1, circuit family that maps the inputs ¯x to A(xi)’s and b(xi)’s. Using the previously described bits-to-rational conversion gates, we turn these into rational representations. Each of these matrices has bounded dimension d. Iterated matrix multiplication, as well as iterated matrix addition, for matrices of a bounded dimension over any semiring K (here K = Q) can be done using a log depth poly-sized K-arithmetic circuit (Vollmer, 1999). Since Q-arithmetic circuits can be simulated using Z-circuits incurring only a constant number of operations for each gate (see Proposition 4), we obtain a GapNC 1 circuit for outputting w⊤ ¯y. The last step is to perform a positivity check, w⊤ ¯y > 0, which puts the problem in PNC 1.14 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

Theorem 4 (Log-Precision LRNN Upper Bound) . The language recognized by any log-precision LRNN over Q is in 

AC 0[ENC 1].Proof. Let C denote the FO -uniform GapNC 1 circuit constructed in the proof of Theorem 3 that computes w⊤yt > 0.Owing to log precision of the LRNN, this output can take only polynomially many possible values v. Thus, instead of performing a positivity check on w⊤yt (as in construction in Theorem 3), we leverage log-precision to simulate the positivity check with polynomially many equality checks. Specifically, for each possible v, we extend C to build an FO -uniform 

ENC 1-circuit Cv that checks whether the output w⊤yt equals v. The positivity check is then simply an unbounded fan-in OR, and hence an AC 0 circuit, whose inputs are the outputs of Cv for v > 0.

# C. Lower Bounds for DPLR LRNNS 

This section contains four simulation results, organized by architecture and target computation: • RWKV-7 simulates WFAs over Q (Subsection C.2). • RWKV-7 computes iterated 3 × 3 matrix multiplication over Q (Subsection C.3). • DeltaNet simulates WFAs over Q (Subsection C.4). • DeltaNet computes iterated 3 × 3 matrix multiplication over Q (Subsection C.5). 

C.1. Preliminaries Definition 13 (WFA Path Form) . Let ⟨K, ⊕, ⊗⟩ be a semiring. A weighted finite automaton (WFA) is a tuple A =(Q, Σ, {Mσ }σ∈Σ, α, ω ) where Q = {1, . . . , n } is a finite state set, each Mσ ∈ Kn×n is a transition matrix, and α, ω ∈ Kn

are initial/final weight vectors, respectively. The WFA assigns a score to a string w = w1 · · · wn ∈ Σ∗ via 

fA(w) = M  

> π={(sk,t k)}nk=1

απ1 ⊗ O

> i=1

[Mwi ]πk ,π k+1 

!

⊗ ωπn ,

where π iterates over all paths of states of length n.Equivalently, defining matrix multiplication over ⟨K, ⊕, ⊗⟩ , the computation of a WFA can be defined according to 

fA(w) = α⊤ ⊗ Mw1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ Mwn ⊗ ω ∈ K.

Definition 14 (Streaming iterated 3 × 3 matrix multiplication over Z). The input is a token stream of length 9N over alphabet Z, partitioned into N consecutive blocks of length 9. The t-th block encodes a matrix A(t) ∈ Z3×3 in row-major order:  A(t)1,1, A (t)1,2, A (t)1,3, A (t)2,1, A (t)2,2, A (t)2,3, A (t)3,1, A (t)3,2, A (t)3,3

.

The task is to output the product 

PN := A(1) A(2) · · · A(N ) ∈ Z3×3 (equivalently, its 9 entries). 

C.2. Simulating WFAs with RWKV-7 

Let ei ∈ Kd denote the ith standard basis column vector. 

Definition 15 (RWKV-style transition matrix (Peng et al., 2025)) . Fix a dimension d. Given w, a, κ ∈ Kd and a scalar 

λ ∈ K, define 

A(w, a, κ ; λ) := diag( w) − λ κ (a ⊙ κ)⊤,

where ⊙ is elementwise product. To handle WFA transition matrices, we use a primitive that overwrites one coordinate by a dot product of the current state against a prescribed coefficient vector. 15 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

Definition 16 (Dot-product overwrite matrix) . Fix a dimension d, an index dst ∈ { 1, . . . , d }, and a coefficient vector 

c ∈ Kd with cdst = 0 . Define 

U (dst; c) := I − edst e⊤ 

> dst

+ c e⊤ 

> dst

∈ Kd×d.

Equivalently, U (dst; c) is the identity matrix with its dst -th column replaced by c.

Lemma 4 (Effect on row vectors) . For any row vector r ∈ K1×d,

(r U (dst; c)) dst =

> d

X

> i=1

rici, (r U (dst; c)) j = rj (j̸ = dst) .

Lemma 5 (Dot-product overwrite as an RWKV transition) . Fix d, dst , and c ∈ Kd with cdst = 0 . Set 

w = 1, a = edst , κ = edst − c, λ = 1 .

Then A(w, a, κ ; 1) = U (dst; c).Proof. Since a = edst , we have a ⊙ κ = κdst edst . Because cdst = 0 , κdst = 1 , so a ⊙ κ = edst . Thus 

A = I − κ e⊤ 

> dst

= I − (edst − c)e⊤ 

> dst

= I − edst e⊤ 

> dst

+ c e⊤ 

> dst

= U (dst; c).

We now show that any n × n matrix can be applied to a row vector using Θ( n) overwrite steps, provided we have n

additional scratch coordinates. 

Lemma 6 (Apply an arbitrary n × n matrix using 2n overwrites) . Let P ∈ Kn×n. Consider row vectors in dimension 2n

written as [x | s] with x, s ∈ K1×n. There exist m := 2 n overwrite matrices G1(P ), . . . , G m(P ) ∈ K2n×2n such that for all x, s ,

[x | s] G1(P ) · · · Gm(P ) = [ xP | xP ].

Proof. Phase 1 (compute xP into scratch). For each j ∈ { 1, . . . , n }, define c(j) ∈ K2n by c(j) 

> i

= Pi,j for 1 ≤ i ≤ n and 

c(j) 

> i

= 0 for n + 1 ≤ i ≤ 2n. Let Gj (P ) := U (n + j; c(j)). By Lemma 4, this overwrites scratch coordinate n + j with Pni=1 xiPi,j = ( xP )j , leaving all other coordinates unchanged. After n steps, [x | s]G1(P ) · · · Gn(P ) = [ x | xP ].

Phase 2 (copy scratch back to main). For each j ∈ { 1, . . . , n } let d(j) := en+j ∈ K2n and set Gn+j (P ) := U (j; d(j)).This overwrites main coordinate j with the dot product against en+j , i.e. the current scratch coordinate n + j = ( xP )j ,leaving scratch unchanged. Thus after n more steps, [x | xP ]Gn+1 (P ) · · · G2n(P ) = [ xP | xP ].C.2.1. S IMULATION THEOREM 

Theorem 9 (RWKV-7 simulates weighted finite automata over Q). Fix K = Q. Let A = ( Q, Σ, {Mσ }, α, ω ) be an n-state WFA over K (Definition 13), and let w = w1 · · · wT be an input word. Then there exists a 4-layer RWKV-7 network whose output at position T equals fA(w) = αM w1 · · · MwT ω ∈ Q.Proof. We use the “3-layer router + 1-layer multiplicative simulator” template of Peng et al. (2025) (Appendix D), instantiated with a block length m := 2 n and arithmetic dimension 2n.

Block parameters. Let m := 2 n. Write each position as t = ℓm + τ with ℓ ≥ 0 and 1 ≤ τ ≤ m. Introduce a padding token ⊥ and set wt := ⊥ for all t ≤ 0, with M⊥ := I. Let the previous block string be 

˜w(ℓ) := w(ℓ−1) m+1 · · · wℓm ∈ (Σ ∪ {⊥} )m,

which is well-defined for all ℓ due to padding. 16 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

Offline factorization of block products. For each length-m block string ˜w = ˜ w1 · · · ˜wm, define the block product 

P ( ˜ w) := M ˜w1 · · · M ˜wm ∈ Kn×n.

Apply Lemma 6 to obtain overwrite matrices G ˜w, 1, . . . , G ˜w,m ∈ K2n×2n such that for all x, s ∈ K1×n,

[x | s]

> m

Y

> i=1

G ˜w,i = [ xP ( ˜ w) | xP ( ˜ w)] .

Fix one such factorization for each ˜w.

Router (layers 1–3). Define a lookup table Ξ whose key is 



t mod 2 m, w t, w t−1, . . . , w t−(2 m−1) 



,

and whose outputs are: 1. the next factor G ˜w(ℓ),τ to apply at time t (encoded so that the arithmetic layer can set (w, a, κ ) accordingly, using Lemma 5); 2. a “completion” readout vector ˆωt (defined below). Both depend only on the key: ˜w(ℓ) is contained in the last 2m tokens whenever ℓ ≥ 1 (and is all padding when ℓ = 0 ), and 

τ is determined by t mod 2 m. By the finite-window lookup construction of Peng et al. (2025) (Appendix D; instantiated with block length m), a 3-layer RWKV-7 can compute Ξ at every position and write its outputs into the residual stream. 

Arithmetic layer (layer 4). Use a single wkv head of dimension 2n. Initialize the first row of the wkv matrix state using a single additive update on the first token: set v1 = e1 and ˜k1 = [ α | α], so the state becomes e⊤ 

> 1

˜k1. For all t ≥ 2, set the additive term to 0 (i.e. vt = ˜kt = 0), so evolution is purely multiplicative: St = St−1 At.At each time t, the router specifies the factor G ˜w(ℓ),τ . Choose RWKV transition parameters so that At = G ˜w(ℓ),τ ; since each factor is an overwrite matrix, this is possible by Lemma 5. 

Completion vector and correctness. Let pt denote the first row of the arithmetic layer’s wkv state St. As in Peng et al. (2025) (Appendix D), one checks by induction that for t = ℓm + τ ,

pt = [ α | α]

ℓ−2Y

> b=0
> m

Y

> i=1

G ˜w(b),i 

  τY

> i=1

G ˜w(ℓ−1) ,i 



,

with the convention that empty products are I.Define the within-block prefix product 

Rt := Mwℓm +1 · · · Mwt , vt := Rt ω ∈ Kn×1.

Now define the completion vector: 

ˆωt := 

> m

Y 

> i=τ+1

G ˜w(ℓ−1) ,i 

!

·

vt

0



∈ K2n×1.

This ˆωt is a fixed function of the router key (position mod 2m and last 2m tokens), hence it can be returned by the lookup table Ξ.Finally, compute the scalar readout pt ˆωt:

pt ˆωt = α M w1 · · · Mwt ω

using Lemma 6 on each completed block. In particular, at t = T the RWKV-7 output equals fA(w).17 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

C.3. Iterated 3 × 3 Matrix Multiplication with RWKV-7 Theorem 10 (RWKV-7 computes iterated 3 × 3 matrix products over Q). Fix K = Q. There exists a 4-layer RWKV-7 network such that, given the length-9N stream encoding A(1) , . . . , A (N ), the network outputs the 9 entries of PN := 

A(1) A(2) · · · A(N ) (equivalently, vec( PN ) ∈ Q9) at the final position t = 9 N .Proof sketch; full proof follows later. Layers 1–2 compute the position modulo 18 . This yields (i) the within-block offset 

τ ∈ { 1, . . . , 9} and (ii) a block-parity bit b ∈ { 0, 1} that we use to alternate between two halves of an arithmetic state. Layer 3 stores the last 18 tokens (two consecutive length-9 blocks) and, from the key (t mod 18 , w t, . . . , w t−17 ), look up the RWKV transition parameters needed at time t. Concretely, at each token it outputs (in the residual stream) the 

destination index and coefficient vector for a single dot-product overwrite update implementing one coordinate of the map 

x 7 → x B (A(ℓ−1) ), where A(ℓ−1) is the previous block’s matrix. (We treat the pre-sequence padding as “block 0” encoding 

A(0) := I3.) Layer 4 maintains an 18 -dimensional row state [x(0) | x(1) ] ∈ Q1×18 inside the first row of a wkv matrix state, where each half has length 9. During each length-9 block, layer 4 applies nine dot-product overwrites that compute a new vector xnew = xold B(A(ℓ−1) ) in the inactive half, using the parity bit b to select which half is source vs. destination. At the final position t = 9 N , the destination half contains vec( A(1) · · · A(N −1) ). A completion readout (computed by the router from the final finite-window key, which contains the entire last block and hence determines A(N )) outputs the 9 coordinates of vec( A(1) · · · A(N )) via nine dot products. 

Proof. We follow the same “router (layers 1–3) + multiplicative arithmetic (layer 4)” template used in the RWKV-7 regular-language construction (Appendix D of Peng et al. (2025)). 

Step 1: reduce 3 × 3 matrix multiplication to a 9-dimensional linear recurrence. Let vec : Q3×3 → Q1×9 be row-major vectorization: 

vec( P ) := ( P1,1, P 1,2, P 1,3, P 2,1, P 2,2, P 2,3, P 3,1, P 3,2, P 3,3).

Define the block-diagonal embedding 

B(A) := 



A 0 00 A 00 0 A

 ∈ Q9×9.

Right-multiplication by A acts independently on the three rows of P , hence 

vec( P A ) = vec( P ) B(A) for all P, A ∈ Q3×3. (1) Let Pt := A(1) · · · A(t) and xt := vec( Pt). Then 

x0 = vec( I3), xt = xt−1 B(A(t)).

Thus it suffices to maintain the 9-dimensional state xt and repeatedly apply the linear map x 7 → xB (A).

Step 2: implement x 7 → xB (A) with dot-product overwrites in dimension 18 . We use the dot-product overwrite primitive: for any destination coordinate dst and coefficient vector c with cdst = 0 , the overwrite matrix U (dst; c) replaces exactly one coordinate of a row vector with a dot product (Lemmas 4 and 5). In particular, each overwrite matrix can be realized as a single RWKV multiplicative transition (Lemma 5). We maintain an arithmetic row state in dimension 18 written as 

p = [ x(0) | x(1) ], x(0) , x (1) ∈ Q1×9,

together with a bit b ∈ { 0, 1} indicating the active half x(b) (source for dot products). Let π(i, j ) := 3( i − 1) + j be the row-major index map for i, j ∈ { 1, 2, 3}.Fix a 3 × 3 matrix A. The coordinates of xB (A) are length-3 dot products: 

(xB (A)) π(i,j ) =

> 3

X

> k=1

xπ(i,k ) Ak,j . (2) We compute these 9 values into the inactive half x(1 −b) using 9 overwrite steps. For each pair (i, j ) ∈ { 1, 2, 3}2, define: 18 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

• Destination coordinate in the inactive half: 

dst( b; i, j ) := 9(1 − b) + π(i, j ) ∈ { 1, . . . , 18 }.

• Coefficient vector c(b;i,j )(A) ∈ Q18 supported only on the three active coordinates corresponding to row i:

c(b;i,j )(A) 9b+π(i,k ) := Ak,j (k = 1 , 2, 3) , c(b;i,j )(A)u := 0 otherwise .

Since dst( b; i, j ) lies in the inactive half, we have c(b;i,j )(A)dst( b;i,j ) = 0 , so the overwrite is well-formed. Applying 

U (dst( b; i, j ); c(b;i,j )(A)) overwrites precisely the destination coordinate with the dot product of the current row state against c(b;i,j )(A) (Lemma 4), which equals the right-hand side of (2) . Moreover, because each coefficient vector is supported only on the active half, these overwrites do not depend on (and hence do not interfere with) already-written coordinates in the inactive half. If we apply these overwrites for all (i, j ) (in any order, e.g. row-major order), then the inactive half becomes x(b)B(A)

while the active half remains unchanged: 

[x(0) | x(1) ] 7 −→ [x(0) | x(1) ] ·

 Y 

> (i,j )

U (dst( b; i, j ); c(b;i,j )(A)) 



= [ x(0) | x(1) ] with x(1 −b) ← x(b)B(A). (3) 

Step 3: align the 9 overwrites with the token stream using a 3-layer router. We now explain how layers 1–3 produce, at each time t, exactly the overwrite parameters needed by layer 4. Partition the input stream into N blocks of length 9. For convenience, define an additional “block 0” consisting of padding symbols before the sequence; the router will interpret this as encoding I3 and we write A(0) := I3. Let A(ℓ) be the matrix encoded by block ℓ for ℓ = 1 , . . . , N . At any position t in block ℓ (so ℓ ∈ { 1, . . . , N }), the model will apply the update corresponding to the previous matrix A(ℓ−1) (one-block delay). 

Computing (τ, b ) from position. Let τ ∈ { 1, . . . , 9} be the within-block offset and let b ∈ { 0, 1} be the parity bit indicating whether the active half is the first ( b = 0 ) or second ( b = 1 ) half. Both are determined by t mod 18 : specifically, 

τ = 1 + (( t − 1) mod 9) and b is the indicator of whether t mod 18 ∈ { 10 , . . . , 18 }. By Peng et al. (2025, Lemma 6) instantiated with n = 9 , a 2-layer RWKV-7 can output t mod 18 , hence can provide τ and b to deeper layers. 

Recovering the previous block. At time t in block ℓ, the last 18 tokens (wt, w t−1, . . . , w t−17 ) contain the entire previous block ℓ − 1 (all 9 tokens encoding A(ℓ−1) ), together with a prefix of the current block. Therefore, the tuple 

 t mod 18 , w t, w t−1, . . . , w t−17 



uniquely determines the matrix entries of A(ℓ−1) and the current offset τ . By Peng et al. (2025, Lemma 7) instantiated with 

n = 9 , a 3-layer RWKV-7 can implement an arbitrary lookup table on this finite key and write its outputs into the residual stream. 

What the router outputs. Define a lookup table Ξ keyed by (t mod 18 , w t, . . . , w t−17 ) whose output at time t is: 1. the destination index dst( b; i, j ) and coefficient vector c(b;i,j )(A(ℓ−1) ) for the overwrite corresponding to τ = π(i, j );and 2. (optionally) the bit b for the final readout. The existence of such a lookup table is immediate because the key space is finite. By the previous paragraph, layers 1–3 can compute Ξ at every position. Finally, using the weight-preparation linear maps in the time-mixing block, layer 4 converts (dst , c ) into RWKV transition parameters realizing the overwrite matrix U (dst; c) via Lemma 5. 19 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

Step 4: arithmetic in layer 4 and correctness. Layer 4 uses a single wkv head of head dimension 18 . Initialize the first row of the wkv matrix state at the first token by setting 

v1 = e1, ˜k1 = [vec( I3) | 0] ∈ Q1×18 ,

so the wkv state becomes e⊤ 

> 1

˜k1 and its first row equals p1 = [vec( I3) | 0]. For all subsequent positions t ≥ 2, set the additive term to 0 (i.e. vt = ˜kt = 0), so the first row evolves purely multiplicatively as pt = pt−1At.At each position t in block ℓ, the router provides the overwrite parameters corresponding to the matrix A(ℓ−1) and the overwrite index τ . By the discussion above, we choose At = U (dst; c) so that exactly one coordinate of pt−1 is overwritten. After consuming all 9 tokens of block ℓ, equation (3) implies that the inactive half has been filled with 

x(1 −b) = x(b) B(A(ℓ−1) ).

By (1), this corresponds to right-multiplying the current 3 × 3 product by A(ℓ−1) .By induction over blocks, after finishing block ℓ the destination half contains 

vec 



A(1) A(2) · · · A(ℓ−1) 

.

In particular, after finishing the final block ℓ = N , the destination half contains vec( PN −1) where PN −1 := A(1) · · · A(N −1) .We now remove the need for an additional padding block by applying the final multiplication by A(N ) in the readout at the last token. 

Completion readout at t = T = 9 N . Let T := 9 N . Let pT = [ x(0)  

> T

| x(1)  

> T

] ∈ Q1×18 denote the arithmetic layer’s row state at time T , and let bT ∈ { 0, 1} be the block-parity bit computed from T mod 18 . Define the destination-half index 

hT := 1 − bT ∈ { 0, 1} (equivalently, hT = N mod 2 ). Then x(hT ) 

> T

= vec( PN −1).Since T is the last token of block N , the router key (T mod 18 , w T , . . . , w T −17 ) contains the entire block N and hence determines A(N ). For each (i, j ) ∈ { 1, 2, 3}2, define the completion vector 

ˆω(i,j ) 

> T

:= 

> 3

X

> k=1

A(N ) 

> k,j

e 9hT +π(i,k ) ∈ Q18 , where π(i, j ) = 3( i − 1) + j. 

Then 

pT ˆω(i,j ) 

> T

=

> 3

X

> k=1

x(hT ) 

> T,π (i,k )

A(N ) 

> k,j

= vec( PN )π(i,j ).

Each ˆω(i,j ) 

> T

is a fixed function of the router key, so it can be returned by the finite-window lookup in layer 3 at time T . Using nine parallel readouts at the final position (one per (i, j )), the network outputs the nine scalars pT ˆω(i,j ) 

> T

in row-major order, which equal vec( PN ).

C.4. Simulating WFAs with DeltaNet 

This subsection shows that a 4-layer stacked DeltaNet can simulate any weighted finite automaton over Q. Throughout this subsection we fix K = Q and interpret all arithmetic in Q.C.4.1. D ELTA NET MEMORY UPDATE AND THE MULTIPLICATIVE STEP MATRIX 

We consider a DeltaNet layer with matrix state St ∈ Kd×d updated by 

St = St−1

 I − βtktk⊤

> t

 + βtvtk⊤ 

> t

, (4) where βt ∈ K and kt, v t ∈ Kd are computed from the layer input xt (via linear maps / an MLP, as in standard stacked DeltaNet blocks). We will repeatedly use the multiplicative step matrix 

H(β, k ) := I − βkk ⊤ ∈ Kd×d. (5) When vt = 0, the update is purely multiplicative: 

St = St−1H(βt, k t).

20 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

C.4.2. R OUTER PRIMITIVES : POSITION MODULO AND TOKEN BUFFERING 

Notation. Let ei denote the standard basis column vector. We assume the input stream contains an explicit BOS token at 

t = 1 .

Computing t mod 2 m. The router needs a cyclic write index ˜t ≡ t (mod 2 m) to address a 2m-slot token buffer. 

Lemma 7 (DeltaNet can compute position modulo 2m). For any positive integer m, there exists a 2-layer stacked DeltaNet whose output includes a one-hot encoding of ˜t := t mod 2 m at every position t.Proof. The construction mirrors a standard “two-reflections-make-a-rotation” argument. Layer 1 produces the parity bit of t (and can also detect t = 1 via the BOS token). Layer 2 maintains a 2-dimensional continuous state that advances by a fixed angle every two steps: it alternates between two Householder reflections of the form I − 2κκ ⊤, which is exactly 

H(β, k ) with β = 2 and k = κ (and vt = 0). The state therefore cycles through 2m distinct values, one for each residue class modulo 2m. A finite MLP on top of a bank of linear readouts can map these 2m discrete states to a one-hot encoding of ˜t.

Exact token buffering by column overwrite. We store the last 2m tokens by overwriting one designated column per step. 

Lemma 8 (Exact column overwrite) . Fix d and an index dst ∈ { 1, . . . , d }. If βt = 1 and kt = edst , then 

St = St−1(I − edst e⊤

> dst

) + vte⊤

> dst

,

so all columns of St−1 are unchanged except column dst , which becomes exactly vt.Proof. Right-multiplying by (I − edst e⊤

> dst

) zeros column dst and leaves all other columns unchanged; adding vte⊤ 

> dst

writes 

vt into that column. 

Buffer layout. Let L := 2 m. In the buffer layer, use a DeltaNet head dimension 

dbuf := ( |Σ| + 1) + L. 

We interpret: • the first |Σ| + 1 coordinates as a one-hot token space (including padding/BOS as needed); • the last L coordinates as buffer-slot selectors. At time t, let ˜t ∈ { 1, . . . , L } be the residue class from Lemma 7. Write the current token into the ˜t-th buffer slot by setting 

βt = 1 , kt = e(|Σ|+1)+˜ t, vt = ewt ∈ Kdbuf .

By Lemma 8, column (|Σ| + 1) + ˜ t stores exactly the one-hot token vector ewt . Using L read heads with fixed queries 

q(j) = e(|Σ|+1)+ j , the layer can read out all L stored tokens (each as a one-hot vector in the first |Σ| + 1 coordinates) into the residual stream. 

Finite lookup. Given the one-hot encoding of ˜t and the last 2m tokens (read from the buffer), the key space is finite. Thus, an (exponentially wide) feedforward network can implement an arbitrary lookup table on this key and output: (i) the next arithmetic-step parameters (β, k ) for Layer 4, and (ii) a readout vector used to decode the desired scalar output. C.4.3. A RITHMETIC PRIMITIVES REALIZABLE BY MULTIPLICATIVE DELTA NET STEPS 

We now show that the multiplicative matrix H(β, k ) = I − βkk ⊤ can realize the linear operations needed to apply arbitrary matrices. 

Lemma 9 (Coordinate scaling / clearing) . Fix j ∈ { 1, . . . , d } and s ∈ K. Let k = ej and β = 1 − s. Then 

H(β, e j ) = I − (1 − s)ej e⊤

> j

scales coordinate j by s and leaves all other coordinates unchanged. In particular, s = 0 clears coordinate j.

21 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

Proof. For any row vector r ∈ K1×d,

rH (β, e j ) = r − (1 − s)( re j )e⊤ 

> j

,

so (rH )j = rj − (1 − s)rj = sr j and (rH )ℓ = rℓ for ℓ̸ = j.

Definition 17 (Unit transvection) . For src ̸ = dst define the (column) unit transvection 

T (src → dst) := I + esrc e⊤

> dst

.

Right-multiplication by T (src → dst) updates a row vector r by rdst ← rdst + rsrc and leaves all other coordinates unchanged. 

Lemma 10 (Unit transvection as three multiplicative DeltaNet steps) . Assume 12 , 13 ∈ K. Fix src ̸ = dst and define (in dimension d)

u := esrc + edst , w := esrc + 2 edst .

Then 

H(2 , u ) H  12 , e src 

 H  13 , w  = T (src → dst) = I + esrc e⊤

> dst

.

Proof. All three factors act as the identity outside the 2D subspace spanned by esrc , e dst , so it suffices to verify the 2 × 2

restriction. In the ordered basis (esrc , e dst ), we have: 

H(2 , (1 , 1)) = 

−1 −2

−2 −1



, H( 12 , (1 , 0)) = 

 12 00 1



, H( 13 , (1 , 2)) = 

 23 − 23

− 23 − 13



.

Multiplying gives −1 −2

−2 −1

  12 00 1

  23 − 23

− 23 − 13



=

1 10 1



= I + esrc e⊤

> dst

.

Embedding back into the full d-dimensional space proves the claim. 

Lemma 11 (Scaled add via a temp register) . Assume 12 , 13 ∈ K. Fix distinct indices src , dst , tmp and a scalar λ ∈ K. There exists a length-8 sequence of multiplicative matrices of the form H(β, k ) such that for every row vector r with rtmp = 0 ,the resulting row vector r′ satisfies: 

r′ 

> dst

= rdst + λr src , r′ 

> j

= rj (j̸ = dst) , r′ 

> tmp

= 0 .

Proof. Use the following four-stage program, each stage implementable by multiplicative DeltaNet steps: 1. Copy src into tmp by a unit transvection T (src → tmp) , implemented using 3 steps via Lemma 10. 2. Scale tmp by λ using one coordinate scaling: apply H(1 − λ, e tmp ) (Lemma 9). 3. Add tmp into dst by a unit transvection T (tmp → dst) , implemented using 3 steps via Lemma 10. 4. Clear tmp by scaling it by 0: apply H(1 , e tmp ) (Lemma 9). Starting from rtmp = 0 , the net effect is rdst ← rdst + λr src and tmp returns to 0. The total number of multiplicative steps is 3 + 1 + 3 + 1 = 8 .

Applying an arbitrary matrix with scratch coordinates. We now show that any n × n matrix can be applied to a row vector using O(n2) multiplicative DeltaNet steps, given n scratch coordinates and one additional temp coordinate. 

Lemma 12 (Apply any n × n matrix with scratch in O(n2) multiplicative steps) . Assume 12 , 13 ∈ K. Let P ∈ Kn×n.Consider row vectors in dimension 2n + 1 written as 

[x | s | t], x, s ∈ K1×n, t ∈ K.

There exists an explicit sequence of 

m := 8 n2 + 5 n + 1 

matrices G1(P ), . . . , G m(P ) ∈ K(2 n+1) ×(2 n+1) , each of the form H(β, k ), such that for all x, s, t ,

[x | s | t] G1(P ) · · · Gm(P ) = [ xP | xP | 0] .

22 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

Proof. Let the coordinates be indexed as: main: 1, . . . , n, scratch: n + 1 , . . . , 2n, temp: 2n + 1 .

Phase 1 (clear scratch and temp). For each scratch coordinate n + j apply a clear: 

H(1 , e n+j ) (j = 1 , . . . , n ),

and clear temp by H(1 , e 2n+1 ). This uses n + 1 steps and yields [x | 0 | 0] .

Phase 2 (accumulate xP into scratch). For each destination j ∈ { 1, . . . , n } and source i ∈ { 1, . . . , n }, update scratch coordinate n + j by 

(scratch j) ← (scratch j) + Pi,j · (main i)

using Lemma 11 with 

src = i, dst = n + j, tmp = 2 n + 1 , λ = Pi,j .

Each scaled add costs 8 multiplicative steps and leaves temp equal to 0. After all n2 updates, scratch equals xP while main remains x.

Phase 3 (clear main). Clear the main coordinates by applying H(1 , e i) for i = 1 , . . . , n . This uses n steps and yields 

[0 | xP | 0] .

Phase 4 (copy scratch back to main). For each j = 1 , . . . , n , add scratch coordinate n + j into main coordinate j using a unit transvection T (n + j → j), implemented by 3 multiplicative steps via Lemma 10. Since main is 0, after these 3n

steps we have main = xP and scratch remains xP .Summing the step counts gives 

(n + 1) + 8 n2 + n + 3 n = 8 n2 + 5 n + 1 .

C.4.4. S IMULATION THEOREM : A 4-LAYER DELTA NET SIMULATES ANY WFA 

Theorem 11 (DeltaNet simulates weighted finite automata) . Fix K = Q. Let A = ( Q, Σ, {Mσ }, α, ω ) be an n-state WFA over K (Definition 13), and let w = w1 · · · wT be an input word. Then there exists a 4-layer stacked DeltaNet whose scalar output at every position t equals 

α M w1 Mw2 · · · Mwt ω ∈ K.

In particular, at t = T the output equals fA(w).Proof sketch; full proof follows later. We use the same finite-window router + arithmetic template as in Theorem 9 (compute 

t mod 2 m, buffer the last 2m tokens, and look up the next arithmetic step), but implement these router components using DeltaNet primitives. The arithmetic layer now uses only multiplicative DeltaNet steps H(β, k ) = I − βkk ⊤ (Definition 2.3) over K = Q,which guarantees 12 , 13 ∈ K. Lemma 9 shows that H(β, k ) can implement coordinate scalings, and Lemma 10 shows that constant-length products of such steps implement unit transvections rdst ← rdst + rsrc . Combining these primitives, Lemma 12 gives an explicit program applying an arbitrary n × n matrix in m = 8 n2 + 5 n + 1 multiplicative steps (using scratch space and one temporary coordinate). The router streams the corresponding (βt, k t) parameters to the arithmetic layer exactly as in Theorem 9, and the same completion-vector decoding yields fA(w).

Proof. Let 

m := 8 n2 + 5 n + 1 

be the step budget from Lemma 12. For each position t ≥ 1, write t = ℓm + τ with ℓ = ⌊(t − 1) /m ⌋ ≥ 0 and 1 ≤ τ ≤ m.23 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

Offline factorization of block products. Introduce a padding symbol ⊥ and set wt = ⊥ for t ≤ 0 with M⊥ := I. For any length-m block string ˜w = ˜ w1 · · · ˜wm ∈ (Σ ∪ {⊥} )m, define the block product 

P ( ˜ w) := M ˜w1 M ˜w2 · · · M ˜wm ∈ Kn×n.

Apply Lemma 12 to P ( ˜ w) to obtain a fixed sequence 

G ˜w, 1, . . . , G ˜w,m ∈ K(2 n+1) ×(2 n+1) , G ˜w,τ = H(β ˜w,τ , k ˜w,τ ),

such that for all [x | s | t],

[x | s | t]

> m

Y 

> τ=1

G ˜w,τ = [ xP ( ˜ w) | xP ( ˜ w) | 0] .

Fix one such factorization for each possible ˜w.

Layer 1 (parity / first-position features). Layer 1 produces a finite-valued encoding that distinguishes the first position (via BOS) and encodes parity. This can be done by a 1D multiplicative recurrence that toggles sign each step, together with the BOS token. 

Layer 2 (compute t mod 2 m). By Lemma 7, Layer 2 outputs a one-hot encoding of ˜t := t mod 2 m in the residual stream. 

Layer 3 (buffer last 2m tokens and perform a finite lookup). Set L := 2 m and build a 2m-slot cyclic token buffer using Lemma 8, with the buffer layout described earlier. At time t, the buffer contains the last 2m tokens 

(wt, w t−1, . . . , w t−(2 m−1) ),

and Layer 2 provides ˜t = t mod 2 m. Define a lookup table Ξ whose key is 

˜t, w t, w t−1, . . . , w t−(2 m−1) 



,

and whose outputs are: 1. the arithmetic parameters (β(4)  

> t

, k (4)  

> t

) specifying the matrix G ˜w(ℓ−1) ,τ to apply in Layer 4 (defined below); 2. a completion/readout vector ˆωt ∈ K2n+1 (also defined below). Since the key space is finite, an MLP can implement Ξ exactly and write these outputs into the residual stream. 

Layer 4 (arithmetic: purely multiplicative DeltaNet simulation). Layer 4 uses one DeltaNet head of dimension 2n + 1 .We maintain only the first row of St as the arithmetic row vector. 

Initialization. Let p0 = [ α | 0 | 0] ∈ K1×(2 n+1) . On the first token, set S0 = 0 and write S1 = e1p0 by choosing 

β1 = 1 , v1 = e1, k1 = p⊤ 

> 0

.

Then S1 = β1v1k⊤ 

> 1

= e1p0.

Updates. For all t ≥ 2, set vt = 0. Let ˜w(ℓ−1) := w(ℓ−1) m+1 · · · wℓm be the previous completed block string (using ⊥

padding when ℓ = 0 ), and let τ be the within-block offset of t. Layer 3 outputs (β(4)  

> t

, k (4)  

> t

) so that 

H(β(4)  

> t

, k (4)  

> t

) = G ˜w(ℓ−1) ,τ .

Thus, for t ≥ 2 we have St = St−1G ˜w(ℓ−1) ,τ . Let pt denote the first row of St; then pt = pt−1G ˜w(ℓ−1) ,τ .24 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

Correctness via a completion vector. Unrolling the recurrence, if t = ℓm + τ then 

pt = [ α | 0 | 0] 

ℓ−2Y

> b=0
> m

Y

> s=1

G ˜w(b),s 

  τY

> s=1

G ˜w(ℓ−1) ,s 



,

with the convention that empty products are identity. Define the current-block prefix product 

Rt := Mwℓm +1 · · · Mwt ∈ Kn×n, vt := Rt ω ∈ Kn×1.

Define the completion vector 

ˆωt := 

> m

Y 

> s=τ+1

G ˜w(ℓ−1) ,s 

! 

vt

0

0

 ∈ K2n+1 .

This depends only on the router key (position mod 2m and the last 2m tokens), hence can be output by Ξ.Now compute the scalar pt ˆωt: multiplying pt by the remaining factors G ˜w(ℓ−1) ,τ +1 · · · G ˜w(ℓ−1) ,m completes the application of the previous block product. By Lemma 12, the full block product Qms=1 G ˜w(ℓ−1) ,s maps the first n coordinates x to 

xP ( ˜ w(ℓ−1) ) (and duplicates it into scratch), so telescoping over completed blocks yields 

pt ˆωt = α M w1 · · · Mwt ω. 

Readout. At position t, set a DeltaNet query vector qt := ˆ ωt (routed from Layer 3) and read ot = Stqt. Because 

St = e1pt has only the first row nonzero, we have ot = e1 · (pt ˆωt). An output head returns the first coordinate, which equals αM w1 · · · Mwt ω.

C.5. Iterated 3 × 3 Matrix Multiplication with DeltaNet 

We now show that DeltaNet can solve the streaming iterated 3 × 3 matrix multiplication problem (Definition 14) over a bounded-precision modulus, using the same router+arithmetic template as Theorem 11. The main difference is that the arithmetic state dimension is constant ( n = 9 after vectorization), so the required per-superblock step budget is a constant. 

Theorem 12 (DeltaNet computes iterated 3 × 3 matrix products over Q). Fix K = Q. There exists a 4-layer stacked DeltaNet such that, given the stream encoding A(1) , . . . , A (N ) ∈ Q3×3 (Definition 14), the network outputs the 9 entries of 

PN := A(1) A(2) · · · A(N ) ∈ Q3×3

at the final position t = 9 N .Proof. Work over K = Q.

Step 1: reduce right-multiplication to a 9-dimensional linear update. Let vec : Q3×3 → Q1×9 be row-major vectorization. Define the block-diagonal embedding 

B(A) := 



A 0 00 A 00 0 A

 ∈ Q9×9.

Then for all P, A ∈ Q3×3,

vec( P A ) = vec( P ) B(A).

Let xt := vec( A(1) · · · A(t)). Then 

x0 = vec( I3), xt = xt−1 B(A(t)).

Thus it suffices to maintain a 9-dimensional row state and repeatedly apply the linear map x 7 → xB (A).25 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

Step 2: choose a superblock length and step budget. We will apply Lemma 12 with n = 9 , i.e. we maintain an arithmetic state of dimension 2n + 1 = 19 (main 9, scratch 9, temp 1), and can apply any 9 × 9 matrix in 

marith := 8 n2 + 5 n + 1 = 8 · 81 + 45 + 1 = 694 

multiplicative steps. Each input matrix A(t) arrives as 9 tokens. We group matrices into superblocks of length 

L := 78 , so each superblock has 9L = 702 tokens .

Since 702 ≥ 694 , we can schedule the 694 arithmetic steps for a superblock and use the remaining 702 − 694 = 8 token times as identity steps (i.e. apply H(0 , k ) = I). We handle the one-superblock delay by a completion readout at the final position T = 9 N , analogous to the RWKV completion-vector trick: the router computes a readout vector that (i) finishes the remaining multiplicative steps for the previous superblock and (ii) applies the final superblock product in the readout. 

Step 3: define superblock transition matrices. Partition the matrix sequence into superblocks of length L = 78 , except that the final superblock may be shorter. Let B := ⌈N/L ⌉ and let 

r := N − (B − 1) L ∈ { 1, . . . , L }.

For each superblock index b < B define the full-superblock product 

Πb := B(A(( b−1) L+1) ) · · · B(A(bL )) ∈ Q9×9.

For the final superblock define the (possibly partial) product 

ΠB := B(A(( B−1) L+1) ) · · · B(A(N )) ∈ Q9×9.

Then 

vec( PN ) = x0 Π1Π2 · · · ΠB , x0 = vec( I3).

Partition the matrix sequence into superblocks of length L = 78 , except that the final superblock may be shorter. Let 

B := ⌈N/L ⌉ and let 

r := N − (B − 1) L ∈ { 1, . . . , L }.

For each superblock index b < B define the full-superblock product 

Πb := B(A(( b−1) L+1) ) · · · B(A(bL )) ∈ Q9×9.

For the final superblock define the (possibly partial) product 

ΠB := B(A(( B−1) L+1) ) · · · B(A(N )) ∈ Q9×9.

Step 4: offline factorization of each Πb into multiplicative DeltaNet steps. By Lemma 12 (with n = 9 ), for each full 

superblock product Πb with b < B there exists a length-694 sequence of 19 × 19 matrices of the form H(β, k ). Extend this to a length-702 sequence by appending 8 identity steps. Thus each full superblock b < B is associated with a fixed sequence 

Gb, 1, . . . , G b, 702 ∈ Q19 ×19 , Gb,τ = H(βb,τ , k b,τ ).

(We also define G0,τ := I for all τ , corresponding to Π0 := I.) By Lemma 12 (with n = 9 ), for each Πb there exists a length-694 sequence of 19 × 19 matrices of the form H(β, k ) that maps 

[x | s | t] 7 → [xΠb | xΠb | 0] .

Extend this to a length-702 sequence by appending 8 identity steps. Thus each superblock b is associated with a fixed sequence 

Gb, 1, . . . , G b, 702 ∈ Q19 ×19 , Gb,τ = H(βb,τ , k b,τ )

26 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

such that after applying all 702 steps, 

[x | s | t]

> 702

Y 

> τ=1

Gb,τ = [ xΠb | xΠb | 0] .

Fix one such factorization for each possible superblock token string. 

Step 5: the 4-layer DeltaNet construction (router + arithmetic). Layers 1–2 (position modulo). Let mtok := 702 be the token length per superblock. Use Layers 1–2 to compute a one-hot encoding of t mod (2 mtok ) = t mod 1404 (Lemma 7 with m = mtok ) and write it to the residual stream. 

Layer 3 (token buffer + lookup). Maintain a cyclic buffer of the last 2mtok = 1404 tokens using the column overwrite mechanism (Lemma 8) with L = 1404 slots. At time t, the last 1404 tokens contain: • the entire previous superblock (the last 702 tokens), encoding the L = 78 matrices whose product is Πb−1,• and a prefix of the current superblock. Define a lookup table Ξ keyed by 

t mod 1404 , w t, w t−1, . . . , w t−1403 



whose output is the next arithmetic-step parameters (β(4)  

> t

, k (4)  

> t

) specifying the factor Gb−1,τ to apply at this time (one-superblock delay). Because the key space is finite (and of size at most m1404 ≤ N O(1) under m ≤ N c), an MLP can implement Ξ exactly. 

Layer 4 (arithmetic in dimension 19 ). Layer 4 uses one DeltaNet head of dimension 19 and interprets the first row of St as the arithmetic row vector [x | s | t], where x, s ∈ Q1×9 and t ∈ Q.

Initialization (first token). Write [vec( I3) | 0 | 0] into the first row of S1 using one additive write: set β1 = 1 , v1 = e1,and k1 = [vec( I3) | 0 | 0] ⊤.

Purely multiplicative evolution (all later tokens). For all t ≥ 2, set vt = 0 so St = St−1H(βt, k t). Layer 3 provides 

(βt, k t) so that H(βt, k t) = Gb−1,τ , i.e. the τ -th factor for the previous superblock’s product Πb−1. During the first superblock, take Π0 = I and apply identity steps. Let T := 9 N be the final position. Write 

T = ( B − 1) mtok + τ, mtok := 702 , 1 ≤ τ ≤ mtok .

(So τ = 9 r, where r = N − (B − 1) L is the number of matrices in the final superblock.) By construction, at time T the arithmetic layer has applied the first τ factors of the previous full superblock GB−1,1, . . . , G B−1,τ (or identity factors if 

B = 1 ), but it has not applied ΠB . We therefore decode vec( PN ) = x0Π1 · · · ΠB using a completion readout at time T .

Final readout via completion vectors. Let pT ∈ Q1×19 denote the arithmetic layer’s first-row state at time T . For each output coordinate j ∈ { 1, . . . , 9} define the completion vector 

ˆω(j) 

> T

:= 

> mtok

Y 

> s=τ+1

GB−1,s 

! 

ΠB ej

0

0

 ∈ Q19 ×1,

where the product is interpreted as identity when B = 1 or τ = mtok . This ˆω(j) 

> T

is a fixed function of the finite router key 

(T mod 1404 , w T , w T −1, . . . , w T −1403 ), so it can be returned by the layer-3 lookup. The network outputs the nine scalars 

pT ˆω(j) 

> T

=  vec( PN ) 

> j

, j = 1 , . . . , 9,

i.e. the 9 entries of PN in row-major order, at the final position T = 9 N .27 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

# D. Upper Bounds on PD LRNNs 

Theorem 7. Let M be a multi-layer PD LRNN over Q. Then the language recognized by M is in FO -uniform NC 1.Proof. The theorem reduces to showing that the product of a sequence of matrices P1D1, . . . , P nDn can be computed in 

FO -uniform NC 1. Terzic et al. (2025) observe PD matrices are closed under multiplication, so this product also has PD form. Let Qni=1 PiDi = ˜Pn ˜Dn. We will provide a closed form for ˜Pi and ˜Di, which will be easy to compute in NC 1.We first observe that P D = D′P where D′ is a diagonal matrix obtained by permuting the diagonal entries of D using the permutation represented by P . Formally, D′ = diag −1(P diag( D)) , where diag( ·) denotes the function that maps diagonal matrices to the corresponding vector. We will prove by induction that ˜Pn = Qni=1 Pi, ˜D1 = D1, and for n ≥ 2, ˜Dn = diag −1(Pn diag( ˜Dn−1)) Dn.The base case of n = 1 holds trivially. For n ≥ 2, assume by induction that Qn−1 

> i=1

PiDi = ˜Pn−1 ˜Dn−1. Then Qni=1 PiDi =˜Pn−1 ˜Dn−1PnDn. Applying our “swap” observation above to the two elements in the middle, this equals ˜Pn−1Pn ˜D′

> n−1

Dn,where ˜D′ 

> n−1

= diag −1(Pn diag( ˜Dn−1)) . This makes the overall product simplify to ˜Pn ˜Dn, as desired. We now prove that ˜Pn and ˜Dn can be computed in FO -uniform NC 1. First, note that ˜Pi = Qni=1 Pi is the product of n fixed size 0-1 matrices. These matrices can take only finitely many different values. More specifically, they form a finite monoid, making their product computable via a standard binary tree construction using an NC 1 circuit. For computing ˜Dn, let πi denote the permutation represented by Pi. For such a permutation π and a diagonal matrix D, let 

π(D) denote the diagonal matrix obtained by applying the permutation π to the diagonal entries of D. Note that π(D1D2) = 

π(D1)π(D2) and that π1(π2(D)) = ( π2π1)( D). In this notation, we can rewrite ˜Dn (for n ≥ 2) simply as πn( ˜Dn−1)Dn.Expanding this out, we get ˜Dn = πn(πn−1( ˜Dn−2)Dn−1)Dn, which simplifies to (πn ◦ πn−1)( ˜Dn−2) · πn(Dn−1) · Dn,where ◦ denotes standard function composition, which will write below simply as a product. Expanding this further, we obtain 

˜Dn =

> n

Y

> j=1
> j+1

Y

> i=n

πi

!

(Dj )

which can be rewritten as ˜Dn = Qnj=1 ˜πj (Dj ) where ˜πj is the permutation composition Qj+1  

> i=n

πi. As with ˜Pn earlier, all permutation compositions ˜πj can be computed in NC 1. From this, we can easily compute the permuted diagonal matrices 

˜πi(Dj ). The product of n resulting (fixed size) diagonal matrices can again be computed in NC 1 as before. Finally, all these 

NC 1 constructions are standard and known to be FO uniform. 

# E. Single-Layer LRNNs 

E.1. Inexpressibility of Deterministic Graph Connectivity 

Our main results (Section 3) show that, assuming PNC 1̸ = L, multilayer linear RNNs cannot solve the sorted deterministic graph connectivity problem. The same result holds unconditionally in the single layer case, since a single-layer linear RNN is a WFA and no WFA can represent the sorted deterministic graph connectivity problem (cf. Section 3): 

Theorem 13. No weighted finite automaton can recognize sorted deterministic graph connectivity. Proof. Assume by way of contradiction that we can represent sorted deterministic graph connectivity. Then the Hankel matrix for this language has finite rank (Carlyle & Paz, 1971). But we can easily construct an unbounded-rank subblock of the Hankel matrix where the rows are s and columns are t, and there are no edges in the graph (this yields the identity). Thus, we have reached a contradiction and this problem must not be representable. A single-layer linear RNN can be simulated by a weighted finite automaton (Merrill et al., 2020, Theorem 4). Therefore, no linear RNN with just one layer can solve sorted deterministic graph connectivity, in the following sense: 

Corollary 8. The hidden state of a single linear RNN layer cannot solve sorted deterministic graph connectivity. 

28 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

E.2. Single-Layer PD LRNNs Correspond to Deterministic WFAs Theorem 8. One-layer PD LRNNs over Q recognize the same languages as deterministic WFAs. Proof. In a single-layer PD-LRNN, Pi and Di only depend on the input symbol σi, and their product contains exactly one nonzero entry. Thus, a single-layer PD-SSM is a special case of a deterministic WFA. In the other direction, we can represent an arbitrary deterministic WFA transition matrix in PD form as follows. We set the size of the transitions to the number of states. For each σ and state q, we set Pσ to be 1 at the unique q′ to which q

transitions. We set the entry in Dσ corresponding to q to have the weight of this transition. Thus, a single-layer PD LRNN is equivalent to a deterministic WFA. The connection between LRNNs and WFAs shown here motivates considering a connection with an older line of work on rational recurrences (Peng et al., 2018). The central idea here, before the emergence of transformer, was that constraining RNNs so that their state was computable by a WFA was desirable because it made them more computationally efficient. Our results here reveal why: one-layer LRNNs are a kind of rational recurrence, and all rational recurrences can be computed in 

PNC 1, i.e., in a highly parallel fashion. 

# F. Arithmetic Circuits over Q

We define arithmetic circuits over the rational field ⟨Q; + , −, ×, 0, 1⟩, which we often write simply as Q. We represent a rational number a/b as a pair (a, b ) of integers. An arithmetic circuit C over Q with n input nodes gives rise to a function 

f : {0, 1}n → Z×Z. That is, the circuit will output a representation a/b of a rational number, but it might not be normalized. We show below that no problems arise in this way. 

Proposition 4. Any arithmetic circuit family C = {Cn}n≥1 over Q with logarithmic depth gives rise to a GapNC 1 function. Therefore, it can be expressed as a boolean bounded-fan-in circuit family with O(log n log ∗ n) depth. Proof. To prove this, simply note that over Q:

ab + cd = ad + bc bc 

and ab × cd = ac bd .

Similarly, − ab = −ab . Therefore, each Q-operation can be simulated with at most four Z-operations. Therefore, if C has log depth, then so are the Z-circuits simulating C.So, as a corollary, C can be expressed as a boolean bounded-fan-in circuit family with O(log n log ∗ n) depth. 

# G. Additional Details for Experiments 

Benchmark. We evaluate models on a suite of synthetic algorithmic tasks designed to test length generalization. 

Deterministic graph reachability. We construct a synthetic reachability dataset over directed graphs with n vertices. Vertices are assigned to two buckets under label-dependent constraints: for positive samples, vertices 0 and n lie in the same bucket, while for negative samples, they lie in different buckets. All remaining vertices are assigned independently with probability p. Directed edges are then added deterministically by connecting consecutive vertices within each bucket, yielding two disjoint directed paths. Each instance encodes a reachability query from vertex 0 to vertex n as a binary-serialized sequence. 

Iterated matrix multiplication with modulus. This task requires computing prefix products of a sequence of 3 × 3

matrices over the finite ring Zm, where m is a fixed prime. Each example has the form SOS T | m | qk | M1 | · · · | MT

EOS , where T denotes the sequence length, qk is a fixed query index, and each matrix Mt ∈ {− 1, 0, 1}3×3 is sampled independently and rejected until invertible modulo m. Let Pt = M1 · · · Mt mod m denote the prefix product at step t.The target sequence is v1 | · · · | vT , where vt equals the qk-th entry of Pt modulo m. Models are trained with a stepwise classification loss to predict vt at each step. The minimum sequence length for this task is 1.29 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

Iterated matrix multiplication without modulus. In this task, models multiply a sequence of 3 × 3 integer matrices over 

Z and predict a single binary label. Each example has the form SOS T | M1 | · · · | MT EOS , where T is the number of matrices and each Mt ∈ {− 1, 0, 1}3×3 is sampled i.i.d. with probabilities (0 .45 , 0.10 , 0.45) for entries (−1, 0, 1) . Let 

PT = M1M2 · · · MT denote the product over Z; the target label is defined as y = 1 iff (PT )0,0 = 0 , and y = 0 otherwise. We optionally construct balanced splits via rejection sampling to mitigate length-dependent artifacts. Since integer products may overflow for large T , labeling can be performed with an optional clipping cap that truncates intermediate values during multiplication. The minimum sequence length of this task is 1.Across both deterministic graph connectivity and iterated matrix multiplication, we use a largely standardized training setup to enable fair comparison across architectures. As shown in Table 1, all models are trained with AdamW, a fixed batch size of 128, and gradient clipping at 1.0. Learning rates and weight decay are kept consistent within each task, with minor adjustments for architectures that require stronger regularization, such as DeltaNet. Training is capped at 60k steps for deterministic graph connectivity and 60k steps for iterated matrix multiplication, ensuring comparable optimization budgets while isolating architectural inductive biases as the primary source of performance differences.                                                                      

> Task Model Configuration LR Steps
> DGC RNN dm=256 ,L=2 ,dh= 256 ,3×10 −460k Transformer dm=256 ,L=2 ,h= 4 3×10 −460k Mamba dm=256 ,L=2 ,dstate =128 3×10 −460k RWKV-7 dm=256 ,L=2 ,h= 4 3×10 −460k DeltaNet dm=256 ,L=2 ,h= 4 3×10 −460k IMM RNN dm=256 ,L=2 ,dh= 256 ,3×10 −460k Transformer dm=256 ,L=2 ,h= 4 3×10 −460k Mamba dm=256 ,L=2 ,dstate =64 3×10 −460k RWKV-7 dm=256 ,L=2 ,h= 4 3×10 −460k DeltaNet dm=256 ,L=2 ,h= 4 3×10 −460k
> Table 1. Training hyperparameters for deterministic graph connectivity (DGC) and iterated matrix multiplication (IMM). dm,L,dh,h,
> dstate , and LR denote the model dimension, number of layers, hidden size, number of attention heads, SSM state expansion factor, and learning rate, respectively. All models are trained with AdamW, batch size 128, and gradient clipping at 1.0.

# H. Lower bound for P-completeness for nonlinear input-dependent ReLU RNN 

Theorem 14. There exists a nonlinear RNN over Q (a poly-precision datatype) that recognizes a P-complete problem. 

Our reduction goes from a fixed one-state Cost Register Automaton (CRA) A over the semiring (N, +, max) , which takes an input string w ∈ Σ∗ and accepts/rejects it. (Allender et al., 2017) constructed such an automaton such that checking whether w is accepted by A is P-complete. Since we do not need the full machinery of CRA, we will only give the definition for a one-state CRA. A stateless Cost-Register Automaton (sCRA) with variables X = {x1, . . . , x r } is a tuple (Σ , ρ ) such that: • ρ : Σ × → E, where E is a statement of the form x := e, where e an expression of the form max( σ, γ ) or σ + γ, where 

σ, γ ∈ { 0, 1} ∪ X.The transition function ρ yields a one-step variable update function δ : Σ × Nr → Nr in a natural way: δ(a, p 1, . . . , p r ) := (q1, . . . , q r ) such that qi = e[p1/x 1, . . . , p r /x r ] if ρ(a) is of the form qi = e; otherwise, qj = pj for each j̸ = i. That is, each qi is obtained by “executing” the expression E with the valuation xi 7 → pi. This function can be extended to 

δ : Σ ∗Nr → Nr by “executing” δ on an input string w ∈ Σ∗. That is, if a ∈ Σ and w ∈ Σ∗, we define 

δ(aw, ¯p) := δ(w, δ (a, ¯p)) .

The language L(A) of A is defined to be the set of w ∈ Σ∗ such that δ(w, ¯0) = ( q1, . . . , q r ) with q1 > 0. That is, starting by initializing all variables to 0, we execute instructions as dictated by w and accept if the final value of x1 is positive. 

Proof of Theorem 14. Given an sCRA A = (Σ , ρ ) with variables X = {x1, . . . , x r }, we will construct a nonlinear RNN simulating A. More precisely, the ith step of the RNN simulates the ith step of A. The RNN uses as states (y1, . . . , y r ) ∈ Qr .30 Why are Linear RNNs More Parallelizable? 

It starts with initial value (0 , . . . , 0) . Given an input w = a1 · · · an ∈ Σ∗, we assume that we have obtained a sequence 

(A1, b 1), . . . , (An, b n) of matrices Ai : Nr → Nr and vectors bi ∈ Nr . In particular, if ρ(ai) is of the form xj := e, where 

e is either x + y, x − y then Ai(¯ p) = δ(a, ¯p) and bi = ¯ 0. If e is of the for x − c or x + c, then Ai is the identity matrix and bi = (0 , . . . , 1, . . . , 0) , where 1 occurs at position j. If e is max( xs, x t), then we Ai : ¯ x 7 → ¯y, where yj = xs − xt and 

yk = xk (k̸ = j). Thus, the nonlinear RNN has updates of the form ht = ReLU (Atht−1 + bt). At the end, we accept the string if it ends up at a state (q1, . . . , q r ) ∈ Nr satisfying q1 > 0.31