Title: How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals?

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.00312v1

Published Time: Tue, 03 Mar 2026 01:22:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
## How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

Maxwell A. Xu 1 2 Harish Haresumadram 1 Catherine W. Liu 3 Patrick Langer 4 Jathurshan Pradeepkumar 1

Wanting Mao 1 Sunita J. Ferns 5 Aradhana Verma 6 Jimeng Sun 1 Paul Schmiedmayer 6 Xin Liu 7 2 

Daniel McDuff 7 2 Emily B. Fox 6 James M. Rehg 1

Abstract 

While multimodal large language models offer a promising solution to the “black box” nature of health AI by generating interpretable reason-ing traces, verifying the validity of these traces remains a critical challenge. Existing evaluation methods are either unscalable, relying on man-ual clinician review, or superficial, utilizing proxy metrics (e.g. QA) that fail to capture the semantic correctness of clinical logic. In this work, we in-troduce a reproducible framework for evaluating reasoning in ECG signals. We propose decom-posing reasoning into two distinct, components: (i) Perception, the accurate identification of pat-terns within the raw signal, and (ii) Deduction, the logical application of domain knowledge to those patterns. To evaluate Perception, we employ an agentic framework that generates code to em-pirically verify the temporal structures described in the reasoning trace. To evaluate Deduction, we measure the alignment of the model’s logic against a structured database of established clin-ical criteria in a retrieval-based approach. This dual-verification method enables the scalable as-sessment of “true” reasoning capabilities. 

1. Introduction 

Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have led to their widespread adoption in medical applications, driven by their multimodal data analysis capabilities combined with a natural language interface, which provides a flexible tool for addressing a wide range of health-related questions. While the predictive performance of these models has continued to advance in a wide range of clinical domains, key challenges remain. A basic question is whether the outputs of an LLM can be trusted for a given 

> 1

University of Illinois Urbana Champaign 2Google Inc 3Rush University 4ETH Zurich 5St. Christopher’s Hospital for Children 

> 6

Stanford University 7University of Washington. Correspondence to: Maxwell Xu <maxu@illinois.edu >.

Preprint. March 3, 2026. Table 1. Comparison of Reasoning Evaluations. Current meth-ods typically force a trade-off between scalability and depth. Ob-jective proxies (e.g. QA) measure final answer accuracy but ignore the reasoning trace, while Expert Assessment is neither repro-ducible nor scalable. Furthermore, rigid methods like Step-wise (standard in math) fail in health because they assume a single correct derivation chain. In contrast, clinical diagnosis allows for 

multiple valid reasoning paths : different experts often cite distinct but equally valid sets of features to support the same diagnosis.   

> Method Applicable to Health Data Assesses Reasoning Text Inspects Non-Text Modality Allows Multiple Valid Reasonings Reproducible
> Step-wise Decomposition

✓ ✓ ✓ 

> Question Answering

✓ ✓ 

> Zero-shot Classification

✓ ✓ 

> n-gram Match

✓ ✓ ✓ 

> Expert Assessment

✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 

> ECG ReasonEval
> (Ours)

✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

clinical application. One key tool in addressing end user trust in LLM outputs is the production of reasoning traces ,sometimes called Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning, which consists of a series of sentences that seem to explain the analysis underlying the model’s output. While reasoning capabilities have been used extensively (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024), there remains significant skepticism whether a language model’s reasoning is genuine or merely hallucinated (Shojaee et al., 2025). Consequently, a fundamental question persists regarding how LLM reasoning should be properly evaluated (Lyu et al., 2023; Lanham et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). While multimodal health models with reasoning capabilities have emerged recently, such as OpenTSLM (Langer et al., 2025) and QoQ-Med (Dai et al., 2025), at present there is no systematic way to evaluate the quality of the reasoning output of these models, and as a result it is unclear whether such reasoning is in fact a useful tool for improving the trust and usability of model predictions. Benchmarking rea-soning capabilities at scale is a fundamentally challenging problem, because traces constitute a complex, semantically rich output space and correctness depends on assessing both fidelity to the input data and alignment with standard 1

> arXiv:2603.00312v1 [cs.AI] 27 Feb 2026

How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? Data Science Agent  verify_perception(ecg)  Function    

> def verify_perception(ecg):
> ...
> return bool(RR_var > .1)
> Predefined
> ECG Tools
> Positive Perception
> 1. Parse findings from the reasoning.
> "RR intervals are irregularly irregular"
> 2. Write the verify_perception(ecg) function to check them.
> RAG-based Retrieval
> Find top-kcriteria, ranked by text embedding similarity.

Perception:  Does the reasoning describe the signal? 

Deduction:  Does the reasoning follow clinical consensus? 

> Reasoning Trace
> ECG Signal
> Multimodal Sensor Language Model
> for Evaluation

Inputs         

> The RR intervals are irregularly irregular ;this implies the patient has atrial fibrillation.
> The signal DID have irregular RR intervals
> Negative Perception
> The signal did NOT have irregular RR intervals
> Database of Medical ECG Knowledge
> Preprocesses articles from ECGpedia, LITFL,
> Wikipedia, WikiEM
> Text Cleaning Agent
> High Precision@1
> AFib matched
> Lower Precision@3
> Only 2/3 AFib matched bc irregular RRs can also imply Multifocal Atrial Tachycardia
> Criteria 2
> "irregular RR intervals, >= 3 distinct p-wave shapes, > 100 bpm"
> Label: Multifocal Atrial Tachycardia
> Criteria 1
> "irregularly irregular
> RR intervals"
> Label: Atrial Fibrillation
> Criteria 3
> "no P waves with
> irregularly irregular rhythm"
> Label: Atrial Fibrillation

Figure 1. ECG ReasonEval Framework. We decompose reasoning evaluation into two independent axes: (i) Perception , verifying if rea-soning is grounded in the signal, and (ii) Deduction , evaluating if the logic aligns with clinical consensus. For Perception, we employ a flex-ible data science agent that dynamically writes and executes Python code to verify specific findings. For Deduction, we query a medical cri-teria database with the reasoning trace and check if the retrieved criteria are tagged with the same label as the original signal’s ground truth. 

clinical knowledge. Moreover, publicly-available large-scale datasets that combine rich input data with reasoning traces from expert clinicians are rare, making it difficult to obtain reference data for evaluation. As a consequence of these challenges, the evaluation of reasoning in both OpenTSLM and QoQ-Med was limited to the annotation of a subset of reasoning traces by expert clinicians. This manual approach is neither scalable nor reproducible, and is a significant barrier to fair evaluation of reasoning methods, as it is not practical to re-assemble the expert cohort for every new model. To address this gap, researchers often rely on objective proxies for evaluating reasoning, such as question-answering (Oh et al., 2023a; Yue et al., 2024) or zero-shot performance (Chow et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025b), which only emphasize final-answer accuracy or n-gram match (e.g. BLEU score) (Li et al., 2025), which does not capture the semantic correctness of reasoning. This paper presents the first scalable approach to repro-ducibly evaluating the correctness of multimodal LLM reasoning. A key aspect of our approach is to decompose the evaluation task into two separable components: A

Perception task, which assesses whether the reasoning traces have fidelity with the input data (i.e., does the input possess the properties described by reasoning), and a 

Deduction task which assess the alignment of reasoning with clinical knowledge (i.e., are the assertions made in reasoning correct with respect to gold standard clinical expertise). A key strength of this decomposition is that Perception and Deduction can be performed independently, and therefore we don’t require a large-scale dataset of biosignals paired with clinician reasoning traces with every combinatorial pairing of perception and deduction. We develop our novel evaluation approach for the domain of ECG signal analysis to demonstrate a strong initial proof of concept. ECG analysis is an attractive domain for our investigation for two reasons. First, the signal is characterized by standardized morphological features (e.g., P-waves, QRS complexes) explicitly designed for visual inspection by a cardiologist, rendering the Perception task objectively verifiable. Second, the clinical knowledge base for ECG analysis is mature and well-documented, making it feasible to create a well-defined clinical knowledge database for the Deduction task. While ECG reasoning is the focus of this work, we believe our formulation can be extended to a broad set of clinical domains. Figure 1 shows our overall approach, which we illustrate with a concrete example of an ECG reasoning trace: “The RR intervals are irregularly irregular, which implies Atrial Fibrillation”. To validate this assertion, we must first verify 

(i) Perception: Are the R-peaks in the actual signal irreg-ularly spaced? Then, we must verify (ii) Deduction: Do irregular RR intervals necessarily imply Atrial Fibrillation? For Perception, we develop an agentic framework in which an LLM equipped with specialized tools writes code that em-pirically verifies that the temporal structures described are in fact present in the signal. Next, we evaluate Deduction by comparing the reasoning assertions to the established med-ical literature. Leveraging the fact that medical diagnoses are exhaustively documented, we first parse online cardiol-ogy resources into a structured reference database. Using 2How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

a Retrieval approach, we can then quantify the validity of a reasoning trace by measuring how often it can retrieve crite-ria are tagged with the same label as its ground truth label. Our key contributions are: 1. A Reasoning Evaluation Framework: We introduce 

ECG ReasonEval 1, the first reproducible framework for evaluating the semantic correctness of reasoning traces in multimodal time-series models. Our automated approach provides a reliable standard that obviates the need for unscalable manual review for every new model. 2. Novel Decomposition Methodology: We decompose reasoning into Perception (grounding in signal features) and Deduction (alignment with clinical consensus). We operationalize these independently using agentic verification for signal fidelity and retrieval for clinical logic. Our experiments confirm the framework’s robustness, demonstrating its ability to audit models and even identify errors in cardiologist annotations. 3. Insights on Multimodal Models: TSLMs show good Per-ception but lack medical knowledge for Deduction. Fron-tier LLMs do well in Deduction but seem to hallucinate signal features post-hoc. This confirms that high predic-tive accuracy does not imply trustworthy reasoning. 

2. Related Work 

Time-Series Language Models. Integrating time-series with LLMs remains challenging. Common approaches include tokenizing signals for forecasting (Gruver et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2024) or projecting embeddings for classi-fication (Pillai et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025), though these often lack text generation capabilities. Recent work has shifted towards unified architectures capable of complex reasoning and question-answering (Wang et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2024). QoQ-Med is a model (Dai et al., 2025), which integrates many heterogeneous modalities, such as X-Ray, CT Scan, MRI, and ECG, and generates reasoning text for predicting labels with Relative Policy Optimization. Models such as GEM (Lan et al., 2025) and OpenTSLM (Langer et al., 2025) have been trained on ECG signals, and both use external models (e.g. GPT4o) to generate viable reasoning traces for training. 

Evaluating Reasoning. General reasoning benchmarks typically rely on final-answer accuracy in QA formats (e.g., Humanity’s Last Exam (Phan et al., 2025)) or step-wise decomposition for math problems (Zhou et al., 2025). How-ever, unlike the rigid logic of mathematics, clinical interpre-tation is often ambiguous and will not have consistency on annotated intermediate steps required for such granular eval-uation (Davies et al., 2019). Physicians often use different lines of reasoning to reach a diagnosis (Norman et al., 2017) 

> 1

Code and Data available here: url omitted for public arxiv. def verify_perception(ecg_signal, ecg_features_dict): 

> ### Check 1: "Sinus Rhythm"
> # Check for regular rhythm using RR intervals from lead II, P wave presence, and reasonable HR
> f2 = ecg_features_dict.get('II', {})
> rr, hr = f2.get('RR_intervals_(msec)', []), f2.get('avg_heart_rate_(bpm)', 0)
> # Sinus rhythm: regular RR intervals (CV < 15%), P waves present, HR 40-150
> is_reg = (np.std(rr) / np.mean(rr) < 0.15) if len(rr) > 1 and np.mean(rr) > 0 else False
> sinus = bool(is_reg and len(f2.get('P_on_idxs', [])) > 0 and 40 <= hr <= 150)
> ### Check 2: "Lateral T Wave Inversion"
> # T wave inversion = negative T wave amplitude. Present if >= 2 lateral leads (I, aVL, V5, V6) show inversion
> # (to account for normal variants in single leads)
> lat_inv = sum(1 for l in ['I', 'aVL', 'V5', 'V6']
> if (t := ecg_features_dict.get(l, {}).get('avg_T_peak_amp_(mv)')) is not None and t < 0)
> return {'Sinus Rhythm': sinus, 'Lateral T Wave Inversion': lat_inv >= 2}

2) Write verify_perception(ecg) 

Sinus rhythm.  There is further evolution of probable recent anterior wall myocardial infarction with  lateral T wave inversion  consistent with ongoing myocardial ischemia or extension of myocardial infarction. 

1)  Parse Findings from Reasoning 

{'Sinus Rhythm': True,  'Lateral T Wave Inversion': True} 

3) Run Func on the Paired and Pre-Segmented ECG 

4)  Results 

Perception:  Does the reasoning describe the signal? 

Figure 2. The Perception Pipeline. First, our data science agent extracts discrete, verifiable findings from the reasoning trace. It then generates executable Python code to empirically verify these claims against the raw ECG signal. This process is augmented by a segmentation tool, which lowers the code generation complexity by providing pre-computed wave delineations. The pipeline outputs a boolean verification status for each finding, determining if the reasoning describes the signal accurately. 

with high inter-rater variability (Magee et al., 2014; Cook et al., 2020; Magee et al., 2014). 

3. Methodology 

Here, we describe the Perception and Deduction phases of our framework, which is illustrated in Figure 1. Please refer to Appendices F and G for additional details (e.g., prompts). 

3.1. Perception Phase 

This phase evaluates if the reasoning describes the actual signal. The inference is visualized in Figure 2. 

Motivation. The goal is to autonomously determine if a reasoning trace refers to observable patterns empirically present in the signal. The feasibility of using LLMs to gen-erate code for data analysis is well-established (Gu et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024; Merrill et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2024; Yin et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025a; 2024). In the health do-main specifically, Heydari et al. (2025) successfully applied this approach to answer complex, open-ended queries (e.g. ”Has my average daily step count significantly changed in the past year?”) on a user’s wearable data for a personal 3How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

Table 2. Assessment of ECG ReasonEval Perception. We eval-uate our Perception pipeline’s reliability using two protocols: Sup-porting Assessment , which measures the verification rate of ground-truth cardiologist notes, and Adversarial Assessment , which tests robustness against hallucination by inverting clinical descriptors (e.g. Wide ↔ Narrow QRS). The strong performance gap between these settings confirms that ECG ReasonEval effectively distin-guishes between present and absent signal features.                            

> Perception Assessment ↑↑Supporting Assessment ↓↓Adversarial Assessment Global Acc Acc@ Thresh50% Acc@ Thresh100% Acc@ Thresh100%
> ECG ReasonEval 0.830 ±.000 0.939 ±.002 0.669 ±.009 0.124 ±.005
> Ablations
> w/o Parsing Findings 0.631 ±.014 –0.631 ±.014 0.138 ±.003
> w/o Unified Agent 0.715 ±.006 0.842 ±.005 0.463 ±.017 0.088 ±.008
> w/o DL Segment Tool 0.754 ±.010 0.913 ±.006 0.581 ±.003 0.128 ±.005
> w/o Tools 0.688 ±.020 0.816 ±.017 0.463 ±.019 0.141 ±.003
> w/o Strong LLM 0.506 ±.000 0.635 ±.007 0.244 ±.011 0.027 ±.010

health coach (Google, 2025a). By leveraging these capabili-ties, our agent can programmatically verify the existence of specific ECG features detailed in a given reasoning trace. That being said, applying this approach is not straightfor-ward due to the deep domain expertise involved in designing data science agents. An innocuous statement, such as “the RR interval are irregularly irregular”, while straightforward to a physician, may not be obvious to those without a back-ground in ECGs. It would require the data science agent to recognize that RR intervals represent the time between R peaks and that R peaks are the highest points of an ECG signal, representing the rapid electrical activation (depolar-ization) of the heart’s ventricles, in addition to understanding the normal thresholds for regularity. 

Architectural Design. 

A) Multi-task Single-Agent. We implement a single-agent system that executes two distinct tasks within a single prompt context: (i) extraction and (ii) verification. First, the agent parses the unstructured reasoning trace into discrete, verifiable findings (e.g. [“inconsistent RR intervals”, “ST el-evation > 0.1mV in V1”]). As shown in Table 2, extraction significantly improves performance by forcing the model to explicitly plan its verification logic before generating code, while simultaneously offering granular interpretability. Following this, the agent utilizes a toolset described below to write and execute Python verification functions. We incorporate a self-correcting feedback loop where execution errors prompt the agent to debug its own code. Persistent failure in generating executable logic is treated as a negative result, implying the original reasoning trace was too abstract to be empirically verified. Notably, this failure mode never occurred with ECG ReasonEval across all evaluations: it was only observed within the ablations. Our ablation experiments (Table 2) confirm that this single-agent approach outperforms complex multi-agent baselines for both extraction and verification, which are impacted by 

> “Code is right; Cardiologist note is wrong” : Instances where the ground truth note incorrectly described the ECG. The note is marked wrong after unanimous consensus across our physician team.
> “Code is maybe wrong” : Ambiguous cases where missing demographic data (e.g. age) prevented definitive verification of ”normal” limits.
> “Tool is barely wrong” : Borderline segmentation discrepancies where values marginally exceeded strict thresholds (e.g. QRS of 121ms vs. 120ms).

Figure 3. Causes of Perception Failure. With our team of physi-cians, we manually examined the failed reasoning traces in the val set to categorize error sources. The results suggest Perception is highly reliable and capable of auditing errors in human annotations. 

coordination friction and ‘tool coordination tradeoff’ (Kim et al., 2025), leading to reduced performance. 

B) Specialized Tooling. We equip the agent with domain-specific tools to lower the level of code generation complex-ity. As we rely on the agent’s generated code as a ground-truth evaluation mechanism, minimizing logic errors in the verification process is critical. ECG interpretation relies heavily on segmenting distinct portions of the signal. For example, common findings in cardiologist notes such as “prolonged PR interval”, “wide QRS complex”, and “ST segment elevation” all depend on the accurate delineation of the P, Q, R, S, and T ECG wave boundaries. However, reliably performing segmentation is non-trivial. Classical rule-based algorithms (Emrich et al., 2024; Alarcon et al., 2025) often fail on pathological data de-spite high benchmark scores on healthy signals (Joung et al., 2024). As shown in Table 2, these methods degrade per-formance by frequently hallucinating features. We instead equip our agent with a segmentation tool based on a SOTA DL model explicitly trained on diverse clinical cohorts, re-sulting in robustness across pathologies (Park et al., 2025). This idea can be easily generalized to non-ECG-specific set-tings. For example, given a radiology setting, SOTA vision models can be provided to identify abnormal masses . 

C) Data Science Agent’s LLM Backbone. We utilize Claude 4.5 Opus (Anthropic, 2025), the current state-of-the-art coding model. Crucially, Anthropic does not use API interactions to train models or for routine human reviews of data. Thus, they are compliant with MIMIC-IV’s Credentialed Data Use Agreement (MIT-LCP, 2023), which allows us to deploy the data science agent on MIMIC-IV-ECG (Gow et al., 2023). We also evaluate Claude 3 Haiku in Table 2 (row “w/o Strong LLM”), and find that simpler models lack the necessary capabilities to function effectively as the agent backbone . 4How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

Metrics. Our approach returns a boolean True/False for each finding within a reasoning trace, which enables evalu-ation on a per-reasoning basis. We utilize two metrics: (i) 

Accuracy@Threshold P %, which is the percentage of rea-soning traces with at least P % of the findings within verified. In other words, when P = 100 , then a reasoning is only marked as “correct” when 100% of the findings are verified; and (ii) Global Accuracy, which is the total percentages of verified findings across all reasoning traces. 

Assessment. To ensure our data science agent is able to analyze a wide variety of clinical interpretations found in real-world settings, we validate it on MIMIC-IV-ECG (Gow et al., 2023). It contains cardiologist reports with paired 12-lead ECG recordings (10s at 500 Hz). To reduce exces-sive computational costs, we validate on a random subset of 1,000 Note+ECG pairs from 981 unique patients. We employ a random 10/90 val/test split with val being used for tuning the prompt and other parameters, and report test performance. We perform two types of assessments: 

i) Supporting Assessment: Here, the agent is tasked with programatically verifying that the morphological and rhyth-mic features described in these expert notes are grounded in the raw ECG signals. High Perception rate indicates that our agent possesses sufficient signal processing logic to ver-ify and corroborate cardiologists’ observations, and conse-quently, to accurately ground clinical concepts in time-series data. Ideally, Acc@Thresh100%=1.0 because we trust that the cardiologist notes is describing the ECG signal correctly. 

ii) Adversarial Assessment: To ensure the agent does not blindly validate all inputs, we explicitly flip distinct clinical descriptors found in the notes to their opposite meanings. For example, we change ST elevation to ST depression (see Table 5 in the Appendix for the full list). As these altered statements contradict the ground truth, we expect the agent to return negative Perception results. This serves as a negative control, ensuring the agent can correctly identify when a textual claim does not exist in the waveform. 

Results: Table 2 shows ECG ReasonEval accurately iden-tifies present signal features with high accuracies during the supporting assessment and low ones during adversarial. Our team of physicians performed a manual review of the dis-crepancies when our agent deviates on the validation set, shown in Figure 3. The high incidence of segmentation tool errors (63%) is encouraging, as it implies that the core Perception methodology is sound. Then, because our frame-work is modular, performance can be directly improved by adopting state-of-the-art models as they emerge. The “Code is maybe wrong” cases highlight a clear direction for future work, specifically the need to integrate additional clin-ical context, an essential feature for benchmarking against models that rely on patient metadata. Instances where the “Cardiologist note is wrong” are analyzed in Section 5. 1) Obtain Reasoning and Censor Labels 

4) Retrieve Top-k Most Similar Criteria 

2) Generate Embedding Vector 

3) Cosine Similarity with Database Embeddings 

Database of Medical ECG Knowledge       

> The ECG demonstrates classic features of [CENSORED]: 1) Wide QRS complexes -examining the signal, the QRS duration appears prolonged (>120ms at 100Hz sampling). 2) In V1 and V2, there is a characteristic RSR' pattern ...
> { `embed_vec_1`: {
> text: "irregularly spaced QRS complexes without P waves",
> label: afib,
> source: wikipedia,
> cleanagent: gpt_quote
> },
> `embed_vec_2`: {
> text: "P Wave is Sawtooth in leads II",
> label: aflutter,
> source: ecgpedia,
> cleanagent: gpt_struct
> },
> `embed_vec_n`: {
> text: "RSR' pattern in V1-3 with QRS duration < 120ms",
> label: crbbb,
> source: litfl,
> cleanagent: claude_quote
> } }
> >> 1. [0.9123] Complete Right Bundle Branch Block
> Criteria Text: "... QRS duration greater than or equal to 120 ms in adults, greater than 100 ms in children ages
> 4 to 16 years, and greater than 90 ms in children less than 4 years of age ..."
> >> 2. [0.9122] Complete Right Bundle Branch Block
> Criteria Text: "... rsr′, rsR′, or rSR′ in leads V1 or V2. The R′ or r′ deflection is usually wider than the initial R
> wave. In a minority of patients, a wide and often notched R wave pattern may be seen ..."
> 3. [0.9105] Incomplete Right Bundle Branch Block
> Criteria Text: "QRS wave duration between 100 and 120 ms; rsr, rsR, or rSR in leads V1 or V2"
> >> 4. [0.9069] Complete Right Bundle Branch Block
> Criteria Text: " QRS Complex is RSR' Morphology in leads V1; QRS Complex is RBBB Morphology in leads ..."
> >> 5. [0.9063] Complete Right Bundle Branch Block
> Criteria Text: "... When the "terminal force" of the QRS in V1 is above the baseline (i.e. RSR' wave), it's a RBBB."

Precision@5=0.8 

4)  Results 

> Because ground truth is complete right bundle branch block ...

Deduction:  Does the reasoning follow the clinical consensus? 

Figure 4. The Deduction Pipeline. The input reasoning trace is first censored of its final diagnostic label, embedded using the Gemini model, and used to query our database of diagnostic cri-teria. We retrieve the top-k most semantically similar articles and calculate Precision@ k against the ground truth. A high score indicates that the reasoning trace accurately maps to the correct pathology according to established medical standards, mirroring how physicians cross-reference diagnostic criteria. 

3.2. Deduction Phase 

First, a database must be constructed containing a set of criteria for every diagnostic label. This is accomplished by scraping raw text from authoritative cardiology resources (e.g. LITFL), and then passing it to the Text Cleaning agent. The Deduction pipeline is visualized in Figure 4. 

Architectural Design 

A) Label Compilation. We first establish a comprehen-sive clinical taxonomy to index the diagnostic criteria in our knowledge base. We aggregate the complete set of di-agnostic labels from our downstream evaluation datasets, ECG-QA and MIMIC-IV-ECG. This results in a diverse vo-cabulary of clinically validated terms, spanning high-level diagnostic conditions (e.g. Infarction), rhythm disturbances (e.g. AFib), and form abnormalities (e.g. inverted T wave). 

B) Raw Text Compilation. To populate our knowledge base, we utilize the Google Search API to retrieve the top-5 most relevant articles for each label (e.g. query: “atrial fibrillation site:litfl.com”) from the following domain-specific sources: 

(i) LITFL ECG Library; (ii) Wikipedia; (iii) ECGPedia; and 5How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

(iv) WikiEM. We detail these sources and their license in Section C of the Appendix. We employ site-specific parsing scripts to convert the raw HTML content into standardized Markdown, creating a structured corpus of reference text. This strategy leverages the rich availability of high-quality, open-access medical curricula that serve as the de facto training standard and reference materials for modern physicians. As shown in Table 3, removing any individual source degrades performance across physician evaluations. 

C) Text Cleaning Agent. It parses the scraped articles and isolates specific sets of diagnostic criteria for a given condi-tion. This step is critical because raw search results often contain significant noise, navigational text, or tangentially relevant information. As demonstrated in Table 3 (row “w/o Cleaning Agent”), performance degrades significantly across all physician baselines when this filtration step is removed, highlighting its necessity. To capture the full nuance of clinical consensus, we deploy four distinct variations of the Text Cleaning Agent, defined by the combination of their extraction strategy and LLM backbone. We utilize two complementary strategies: (i) Ex-act Quote Extraction, which identifies verbatim excerpts that define the diagnosis; and (ii) Structured Synthesis, which summarizes and standardizes the criteria into a consistent template. By instantiating each strategy with two state-of-the-art models, Claude 4.5 Opus (Anthropic, 2025) and GPT 5.2 Pro (OpenAI, 2025), we generate four diverse knowl-edge representations per article (2 strategies × 2 models). Table 3 indicates that ensembling the outputs yields the highest performance. By combining exact quotes with stan-dardized summaries across different LLM backbones, we create a richer, more robust semantic target for retrieval. This ensemble approach outperforms any single extraction method or model, confirming that diversity in knowledge representation is key to aligning with expert consensus. 

D) Retrieval of Top-k Criteria. To prevent data leakage, we first censor the input reasoning trace by removing all explicit mentions of the final diagnostic prediction. Subsequently, we extract embeddings of this sanitized trace using Gemini’s text embedding model (Team et al., 2023), and compute its cosine similarity against the pre-computed vector index of our knowledge base. We retrieve the top-k most relevant criteria, and verify alignment by checking if their label matches the ground-truth label of the input data. 

Metrics. We employ Precision@ k, which measures the proportion of the top-k retrieved articles that match the correct ground-truth label. This effectively grades the specificity of the reasoning. A higher precision implies the model’s logic is consistently mapping to the correct disease rather than ambiguous or unrelated conditions. 

Assessment. To validate Deduction as a reliable proxy 

Table 3. Assessment of ECG ReasonEval Deduction. We eval-uate the alignment of our retrieved medical references used during Deduction against diagnostic criteria independently authored by three physicians. The full ECG ReasonEval pipeline consis-tently performs well with high Precision@ k, confirming that our approach effectively captures nuanced “clinical logic”.                                                                                                     

> Deduction Assessment Physician A Physician B Physician C
> ↑↑Precis ↑↑Precis ↑↑Precis ↑↑Precis ↑↑Precis ↑↑Precis ↑↑Precis ↑↑Precis ↑↑Precis @1 @5 @10 @1 @5 @10 @1 @5 @10
> ECG ReasonEval 0.83 0.76 0.69 0.79 0.78 0.71 0.79 0.75 0.70
> Ablations
> w/o Quote Extract 0.73 0.66 0.63 0.83 0.70 0.65 0.72 0.70 0.64 w/o Struct. Extract 0.77 0.65 0.59 0.74 0.73 0.65 0.77 0.73 0.66 w/o two LLMs 0.76 0.72 0.65 0.72 0.70 0.66 0.74 0.69 0.65 w/o Cleaning Agent 0.40 0.42 0.35 0.37 0.40 0.35 0.47 0.42 0.36
> Sources
> w/o LITFL 0.77 0.70 0.64 0.80 0.68 0.65 0.70 0.68 0.65 w/o ECGPedia 0.83 0.77 0.71 0.78 0.77 0.69 0.79 0.73 0.69 w/o Wikipedia 0.76 0.68 0.63 0.71 0.76 0.68 0.74 0.71 0.68 w/o WikiEM 0.78 0.70 0.65 0.76 0.80 0.70 0.77 0.73 0.69

for clinical consensus, our physician team were tasked to independently define diagnostic criteria for each label within our database. Then, each of their defined criteria was run on our Deduction pipeline to assess whether our pipeline is able to correctly align the database criteria to the physician-defined criteria. The team is composed of three practicing physicians with varying levels of expertise: an internal medicine resident (A), a cardiology fellow (B), and a Division Chief of Car-diology (C). We use a 1:2 val/test split. Specifically, we tune our text cleaning agent using the criteria provided by Physician A and subsequently test the agent’s performance against the criteria authored by the Physicians B and C. 

Results. Table 3 demonstrates strong alignment between our database and expert consensus, achieving ∼0.8 Precision@1 across all raters. Further discussion in Section 5. 

4. Experimental Evaluation 

In Section 3, we developed and validated our framework for evaluating the ability of multimodal language models to reason on ECG signals. Here, we describe our experimental setup and the reasoning models we evaluate on. 

Multimodal Reasoning Models. We compare both open and close sourced models, spanning both Time-Series Language Models (TSLMs) as well as two flagship LLMs, Anthropic’s Claude Opus 4.5 (Anthropic, 2025) and Google’s Gemini 3.1 Pro (Google, 2025b). All models are evaluated in a zero-shot fashion. For the TSLMs, we utilize QoQ-Med (Dai et al., 2025) and OpenTSLM (Langer et al., 2025). QoQ-Med is a multi-modal clinical foundation model capable of utilizing any combination of medical imaging (e.g. x-rays, fundus images, pathology), EHR data, text, and ECG, for medical tasks such predicting diagnoses. On the other hand, OpenTSLM is focused on reasoning over medical text and time-series data only. Both models 6How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? Perception:  Does the reasoning describe the signal?  Deduction:  Does the reasoning follow the clinical consensus?     

> Figure 5. Summary of Baselines with ECG ReasonEval on Perception and Deduction. We see all models perform much worse than the physician performance across both perception and deduction. While the TSLMs (OpenTSLM and QoQMed) that were trained with explicit time-series adapters often do better in perception to capture time-series features correctly, frontier VLMs like Claude Opus 4.5 Plot and Gemini 3.1 Plot are able to harness their world knowledge to align with the broader clinical literature, achieving stronger deduction performance. Most notably, Gemini establishes the strongest overall baseline across both perception and deduction metrics.

are also open source and we utilize their original prompts. For Claude Opus 4.5, we provided ECG signals in two formats: raw numerical data and plotted ECG waveforms, allowing us to assess how frontier models can be applied to ECG analysis. For Gemini 3.1, we focus on only the plot variation, as that demonstrated stronger performance. 

Tasks. These models are evaluated on four tasks (full de-tails in Section D): (i) predicting ICD-10 diagnostic codes on MIMIC-IV; (ii) predicting diagnostic, (iii) rhythm, and 

(iv) form pathologies on the ECG-QA dataset. Success on these tasks requires models to integrate both high-level clinical reasoning about diagnostic patterns and low-level analysis of waveform morphology and signal characteristics. For each of these tasks, the models are prompted to pro-vide predictions along with the associated reasoning traces. Subsequently, we pass the inputs and the reasoning traces through our ECG ReasonEval pipeline to obtain the Per-ception and Deduction results. We tabulate full results in the Appendix (Table 4) and show key metrics in Figure 5. 

Results. In Figure 5 (left), we plot Perception perfor-mance across tasks. For ECG-QA rhythm- and form-related symptoms, TSLMs (QoQ-Med and OpenTSLM) achieve the best peak results, verifying 25–30% of rea-soning traces. Meanwhile, Gemini 3.1 Pro Plot demon-strates the most robust consistency, maintaining roughly 15–16% Acc@Thresh100% across all four datasets. How-ever, Acc@Thresh100% remains below 10% for most other cases, highlighting the difficulty of Perception. Relaxing the success threshold to verify at least 50% of findings (Acc@Thresh50%) substantially boosts performance to 70– 80% (Table 4). We approximate the Physician Performance upper bound using assessment data from Section 3.1 rather than conducting infeasible large-scale manual annotation. No model approaches the perception level of a physician. Figure 5 (right) shows that TSLMs underperform on ECG-QA tasks, indicating reasoning that aligns less with medical consensus. In contrast, the frontier model Claude Opus 4.5 produces more accurate deduction performance consis-tent across tasks. Notably, passing plotted ECG signals to Claude Opus 4.5 yields better results than using raw num-bers, likely because general-purpose LLMs lack exposure to raw arrays. Building on the success of vision-based in-puts, Gemini 3.1 Pro Plot establishes a new state-of-the-art for deduction among the evaluated models. It substantially outperforms Claude Opus 4.5 Plot across all datasets, most notably reaching a Precision@5 of 0.48 on the Rhythm dataset. We again approximate the physician upper bound by averaging the performance of physician-defined criteria per dataset from Section 3.2. Consistent with Perception re-sults, physician-based annotations significantly outperform model-based reasoning, demonstrating a substantial gap in deductive capability. 

5. Discussion 

Perception Flags Incorrect and Challenging Cardiolo-gist Reports. Our Perception pipeline serves not only as a verification tool for model outputs but also as a quality assurance mechanism for human-annotated ground truth. In our analysis of Perception failures (Figure 3), we found that in 17% of cases, the “Code is right, Cardiologist note is wrong”. This occurs when the cardiologist’s report contains descriptors that are empirically absent from the signal, sug-gesting the ground truth itself may be flawed or imprecise. Various examples of this failure case with annotations can be found in Appendix (Figures 9, 10, 11, 12). Furthermore, the category “Code is maybe wrong” high-lights the inherent difficulty of verifying reports that rely on external context; for instance, a description of “within normal limits” cannot be verified without demographic data (e.g. patient age). The ability of our framework to catego-7How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? Claude Opus 4.5 (Plot) Reasoning 

> Analysis of this 12-lead ECG reveals several key findings pointing to anterior myocardial infarction: 1) In leads V1-V4 (anterior leads), there are deep negative deflections (Q waves) visible at the beginning of the QRS complexes, with values reaching approximately -1.0 to -2.5 mV, which represent pathological Q waves indicative of myocardial necrosis. 2) The precordial leads V1-V4 show poor R wave progression - the R waves remain small or absent in these leads, which is characteristic of anterior MI. 3) Looking at the ST segments and T waves in V1-V4, there appears to be ST elevation followed by T wave changes consistent with an evolving or established anterior infarction pattern. 4) Lead I shows relatively normal morphology while leads II and III show reciprocal changes. 5) The deep QS complexes in V1-V3 (values dropping to -2.0 to -2.5 mV) are particularly diagnostic of transmural anterior myocardial infarction involving the anteroseptal region. The combination of pathological Q waves, poor R wave progression, and ST-T changes in the anterior precordial leads strongly supports the diagnosis of [censored].

Perception Results  Deduction Results 

Top-5 Most Similar from DB: 

>> 1. [0.9255]  Myocardial infarction in anterior leads 

Criteria Text: "Anterior Q waves (V1-4) with ST elevation due to acute MI." 

>> 2. [0.9215]  Myocardial infarction in anterior leads 

Criteria Text:  "Anterior Q waves (V1-4) with T-wave inversion due to recent MI." 

>> 3. [0.9189]  Myocardial infarction in anterior leads 

Criteria Text:  "Anterior Q waves (V1-4) with ST elevation due to acute MI" 

4. [0.9139]  Ischemic in anteroseptal leads 

Criteria Text:  "Evidence of anteroseptal STEMI – ST elevation with Q wave formation in V1-3." 

>> 5. [0.9095] Myocardial infarction in anterior leads 

Criteria Text:  "Anterior Q waves (V1-4) with T-wave inversion due to recent MI" 

"ST Elevation followed by T wave changes [V1-4]" 

"deep QS complexes [V1-3]" 

"Lead I shows relatively normal morphology" 

"poor R wave progression [V1-4]" 

"deep negative deflections (Q waves) [V1-4]" 

???? 

???? 

Ground Truth  Label: myocardial infarction in anterior leads 

Precision@5 = 0.80 

Figure 6. Sample output of Claude (Plot). Claude often produces correct diagnoses (high Deduction score), but with incorrect time-series reasoning (low Perception score). In this example, ”deep QS complexes” are indicative of myocardial infarction, but do not appear in the ECG. This implies a post-hoc reasoning, in which the model first predicts the label then hallucinates justification. This is further implied by the structure of reasoning text, which first states the diagnosis then causally generates reasoning text. 

rize these discrepancies implies that our agentic perception mechanism is reliable enough to flag potential errors in expert clinical documentation. 

Deduction Works Well for a Range of Different Disease Presentations. Our Deduction evaluation demonstrates re-markable robustness to the stylistic variability of clinical reasoning. As shown in Figure 17, physicians often arrive at the same diagnosis, but with different reasoning criteria and with vastly different linguistic structures. For the diag-nosis of Incomplete Right Bundle Branch Block (IRBBB), Physician A provided a detailed, logic-heavy derivation by stating “AND” and “OR”. In contrast, Physician B provided a terse, exclusionary description (“morphology not meeting criteria for complete RBBB”) without explicitly defining the positive features of IRBBB. Despite Physician B’s de-scription being very short and without much context, our retrieval pipeline successfully retrieved many top-k refer-ence articles for IRBBB (see Figure 4). This confirms that our retrieval-based deduction metric focuses on the semantic clinical logic rather than surface-level keyword matching, making it effective even for atypical descriptions. 

Low Perception and High Deduction Makes an Un-trustworthy Model. A model that excels at Deduction but fails at Perception seems to exhibit a post-hoc reasoning mechanism, where it first predicts the correct label and then hallucinates a justification to fit that label. This phenomenon is most evident in Claude Opus 4.5 (Plot), which achieves strong performance on Deduction tasks and high global accuracy, yet suffers from poor Perception scores. This discrepancy suggests the model is fabricating diagnostic criteria to support its answer. For example, in Figure 6, Claude correctly diagnoses Myocardial Infarction but justifies it by citing “deep QS OpenTSLM Reasoning 

> The ECG recording shows a 12-lead tracing with notable features. The presence of a pacemaker is indicated, which can affect the interpretation of the rhythm and morphology. However, the focus here is on the T-wave morphology. The T-waves are notably inverted in several leads, which can be indicative of various cardiac conditions such as ischemia, ventricular strain, or electrolyte imbalances. The presence of inverted t-waves is a significant finding and can be associated with clinical symptoms such as chest pain or arrhythmias. Given the clinical context and the observed ECG patterns, the form-related symptom present in this ECG is the inversion of T-waves. Answer: inverted t-waves

Perception Results 

Deduction Results      

> Top-5 Most Similar:
> 1. [0.8667] non-specific T-wave changes
> Criteria Text: "T wave inversions are present"
> 2. [0.8658] non-specific T-wave changes
> Criteria Text: " Inverted T waves associated with cardiac signs and symptoms (chest pain and cardiac murmur) are highly suggestive of myocardial ischaemia; T wave symmetrically inverted with a pointed apex, while the ST segment is either bowed upwards or horizontally depressed, or not deviated."
> 3. [0.8658] Inverted T-waves
> Criteria Text: "Inverted T waves associated with cardiac signs and symptoms (chest pain and cardiac murmur) are highly suggestive of myocardial ischaemia; T wave symmetrically inverted with a pointed apex, while the ST segment is either bowed upwards or horizontally depressed, or not deviated"
> 4. [0.8658] T-wave Abnormality
> Criteria Text: "Inverted T waves associated with cardiac signs and symptoms (chest pain and cardiac murmur) are highly suggestive of myocardial ischaemia; T wave symmetrically inverted with a pointed apex, while the ST segment is either bowed upwards or horizontally depressed, or not deviated"
> 5. [0.8611] T-wave Abnormality
> Criteria Text: "T Wave is Upright in leads I, II, V3, V4, V5, V6; T Wave is Inverted in leads aVR, V1; T Wave is Inverted in leads III, aVF, aVL, V1; T Wave is Upright in leads V1; T Wave Amplitude is > T Wave Amplitude in V6 in leads V1; T Wave is Inverted in leads V2, V3, V4, V5, V6; T Wave Amplitude is > 0.67 R Wave Amplitude in leads I, II, III, aVR, aVL, aVF, V1, V2, V3, V4, V5, V6; T Wave is Inverted Symmetric in leads I, II, III, aVR, aVL, aVF, V1, V2, V3, V4, V5, V6"

Ground Truth  Label: 

Left Ventricular Hypertrophy 

"T-waves are notably inverted in several leads" 

Precision@5 = 0.00 

Figure 7. Sample output of OpenTSLM. While OpenTSLM generally has good Perception, their low Deduction performance implies that it suffers from being unable to identify the most salient features for precise diagnosis. In this example, although OpenTSLM correctly perceived the inverted t-waves, it failed to realize that these pathological features, in conjunction with the higher QRS voltage could indicate left ventricular hypertrophy, a disease with significant health implications. 

complexes” and “deep Q waves” that are empirically non-existent in the signal. While these conditions are indeed clinically indicative of infarction, they cannot be valid reasoning if they are absent from the waveform. This creates a dangerous ”illusion of thinking,” where the model produces persuasive, textually accurate medical prose that is ungrounded in patient reality, posing serious trustworthiness concerns for clinical deployment. 

All Perception and No Deduction Makes the Model a Dull Boy. Conversely, models with high Perception but low Deduction act as accurate sensors that lack the world knowl-edge to be clinically useful. This phenotype is observed in Time-Series Language Models (TSLMs) like OpenTSLM. As shown in Figure 7, OpenTSLM successfully identifies the presence of inverted t-waves (Perception), showing that it can “see” the signal features. However, it fails to identify that they are pathological and link it to the correct diagnosis (Left Ventricular Hypertrophy), instead retrieving irrelevant clinical associations. While these models are grounded, they lack the broader medical domain knowledge required to differentially diagnose, limiting their utility to identifying features without understanding their implications. 

Frontier Multimodal Models Show Promise in Balancing Perception and Deduction. While TSLMs and Claude Opus 4.5 demonstrate isolated strengths in either perception or deduction, Gemini 3.1 Pro Plot begins to bridge this gap. As observed in our evaluations, Gemini 3.1 Pro Plot achieves the highest Deduction scores across all datasets (e.g., reaching a Precision@5 of 0.48 on the Rhythm dataset) while simultaneously maintaining the most consistent and highest Perception scores (approximately 15–16% Acc@Thresh100% across all tasks) among the evaluated models. This balanced performance suggests that advanced multimodal architectures can be better equipped 8How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

to both “see” the raw physiological signal and “understand” its clinical implications without immediately resorting to post-hoc hallucination. However, because its perception capabilities still fall far short of the physician upper bound, the model cannot yet be treated as a fully trustworthy autonomous diagnostic agent. 

Final Performance Accuracy Does Not Imply Reasoning Capability. Our results challenge the assumption that pre-dictive accuracy serves as a proxy for reasoning quality. In Figure 8, we observe a strong correlation between Deduction and final accuracy (r=0.70), but a very weak correlation be-tween Perception and final accuracy (r=0.18). This implies that models can achieve high classification performance without actually ‘seeing’ the signal correctly. Furthermore, manual inspection reveals that when a model’s final predic-tion is wrong, its Deduction is almost always wrong as well. This tight coupling suggests that high-performing models may simply be memorizing text-diagnosis pairs rather than engaging in true dual-process reasoning. Consequently, opti-mizing solely for final classification accuracy is suboptimal for developing models that can both describe a signal accu-rately and reason about it. Thus, while fully supervised mod-els remain the optimal choice for maximizing predictive per-formance, the development of systems with genuine reason-ing capabilities requires a distinct evaluation paradigm that does not conflate prediction success with reasoning validity. 

6. Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced ECG ReasonEval , a frame-work that decomposes reasoning into verifiable Perception 

and Deduction components. By operationalizing these axes through agentic verification and retrieval-based consensus, we established a reproducible standard that obviates the need for unscalable manual expert review. While demonstrated on ECGs, our formulation is fundamentally modality-agnostic. Future work should extend this paradigm to other health domains paving the way for trustworthy systems. 

Impact Statement 

This work introduces a scalable verification framework for multimodal healthcare AI, with a focus on the interpretabil-ity of ECG signals. Our work addresses both societal and environmental challenges. By decomposing reasoning into Deduction and Perception, our approach mitigates the risk of hallucinations, which are severely detrimental for medical applications. As such, it provides a pathway towards auditable AI systems in high stakes applications, where task performance is not the sole consideration but user trust is a key factor. The current gold standard for verifying the reasoning logic of healthcare AI models involves manual review by medical professionals. This process is not scalable and subject to the availability of the healthcare workforce. Our agentic verification framework offers a scalable alternative, thereby reducing the load on this workforce while enabling rigorous auditing of model outputs. The environmental costs are a growing concern in the AI and ML communities. We note that deploying large models carries significant carbon footprint and our retrieval-based approach utilizes existing models rather than requiring con-tinuous fine-tuning, and is a more compute and energy effi-cient alternative. 

References 

Alarcon, B., Stalder, D. H., and Morales-Mareco, F. Opti-mization of ecg signal delineation algorithms with dis-crete wavelet transform. Proceeding Series of the Brazil-ian Society of Computational and Applied Mathematics ,11(1):1–2, 2025. Anthropic, A. Introducing claude opus 4.5, Nov 2025. URL https://www.anthropic.com/ news/claude-opus-4-5 .Chen, Y., Sikka, K., Cogswell, M., Ji, H., and Divakaran, A. Measuring and improving chain-of-thought reasoning in vision-language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con-ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 192–210, 2024. Chow, W., Gardiner, L., Hallgr ´ımsson, H. T., Xu, M. A., and Ren, S. Y. Towards time series reasoning with llms. 

NeurIPS Workshop on Time Series in the Age of Large Models , 2024. Cook, D. A., Oh, S.-Y., and Pusic, M. V. Accuracy of physicians’ electrocardiogram interpretations: a system-atic review and meta-analysis. JAMA internal medicine ,180(11):1461–1471, 2020. 9How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

Dai, W., Chen, P., Ekbote, C., and Liang, P. P. Qoq-med: Building multimodal clinical foundation models with domain-aware GRPO training. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=ZwCVFBFUFb .Davies, A., Mueller, J., Horseman, L., Splendiani, B., Hill, E., Vigo, M., Harper, S., and Jay, C. How do healthcare practitioners read electrocardiograms? a dual-process model of electrocardiogram interpretation. British Jour-nal of Cardiac Nursing , 14(10):1–19, 2019. Emrich, J., Gargano, A., Koka, T., and Muma, M. Physiology-informed ecg delineation based on peak prominence. In 2024 32nd European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO) , pp. 1402–1406. IEEE, 2024. Google. Personal health coach with gemini, 2025a. URL https://store.google.com/magazine/ personal_health_coach?hl=en-US&pli=1 .Google. A new era of intelligence with Gemini 3 — blog.google. https://blog.google/ products-and-platforms/products/ gemini/gemini-3/ , 2025b. [Accessed 12-01-2026]. Gow, B., Pollard, T., Nathanson, L. A., Johnson, A., Moody, B., Fernandes, C., Greenbaum, N., Waks, J. W., Eslami, P., Carbonati, T., Chaudhari, A., Herbst, E., Moukheiber, D., Berkowitz, S., Mark, R., and Horng, S. MIMIC-IV-ECG: Diagnostic electrocardiogram matched subset (version 1.0), 2023. URL https://doi.org/10. 13026/4nqg-sb35 .Gruver, N., Finzi, M., Qiu, S., and Wilson, A. G. Large language models are zero-shot time series forecasters. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 19622–19635, 2023. Gu, K., Shang, R., Jiang, R., Kuang, K., Lin, R.-J., Lyu, D., Mao, Y., Pan, Y., Wu, T., Yu, J., et al. Blade: Bench-marking language model agents for data-driven science. 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: EMNLP 2024 , 2024. Heydari, A. A., Gu, K., Srinivas, V., Yu, H., Zhang, Z., Zhang, Y., Paruchuri, A., He, Q., Palangi, H., Ham-merquist, N., et al. The anatomy of a personal health agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.20148 , 2025. Hu, X., Zhao, Z., Wei, S., Chai, Z., Ma, Q., Wang, G., Wang, X., Su, J., Xu, J., Zhu, M., et al. Infiagent-dabench: Evaluating agents on data analysis tasks. International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Ji, S., Zheng, X., and Wu, C. Hargpt: Are llms zero-shot human activity recognizers? In 2024 IEEE International Workshop on Foundation Models for Cyber-Physical Sys-tems & Internet of Things (FMSys) , pp. 38–43. IEEE, 2024. Joung, C., Kim, M., Paik, T., Kong, S.-H., Oh, S.-Y., Jeon, W. K., Jeon, J.-h., Hong, J.-S., Kim, W.-J., Kook, W., et al. Deep learning based ecg segmentation for delineation of diverse arrhythmias. PloS one , 19(6):e0303178, 2024. Kim, Y., Gu, K., Park, C., Park, C., Schmidgall, S., Heydari, A. A., Yan, Y., Zhang, Z., Zhuang, Y., Malhotra, M., et al. Towards a science of scaling agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.08296 , 2025. Lan, X., Wu, F., He, K., Zhao, Q., Hong, S., and Feng, M. Gem: Empowering mllm for grounded ecg under-standing with time series and images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06073 , 2025. Langer, P., Kaar, T., Rosenblattl, M., Xu, M. A., Chow, W., Maritsch, M., Verma, A., Han, B., Kim, D. S., Chubb, H., et al. Opentslm: Time-series language models for reasoning over multivariate medical text-and time-series data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02410 , 2025. Lanham, T., Chen, A., Radhakrishnan, A., Steiner, B., Deni-son, C., Hernandez, D., Li, D., Durmus, E., Hubinger, E., Kernion, J., et al. Measuring faithfulness in chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13702 ,2023. Li, Z., Deldari, S., Chen, L., Xue, H., and Salim, F. D. Sensorllm: Aligning large language models with motion sensors for human activity recognition. Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , 2025. Lyu, Q., Havaldar, S., Stein, A., Zhang, L., Rao, D., Wong, E., Apidianaki, M., and Callison-Burch, C. Faithful chain-of-thought reasoning. In The 13th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing and the 3rd Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (IJCNLP-AACL 2023) ,2023. Magee, C., Kazman, J., Haigney, M., Oriscello, R., DeZee, K. J., Deuster, P., Depenbrock, P., and O’Connor, F. G. Reliability and validity of clinician ecg interpretation for athletes. Annals of Noninvasive Electrocardiology , 19(4): 319–329, 2014. Merrill, M. A., Paruchuri, A., Rezaei, N., Kovacs, G., Perez, J., Liu, Y., Schenck, E., Hammerquist, N., Sunshine, J., Tailor, S., et al. Transforming wearable data into health insights using large language model agents. Nature Communications , 2025. 10 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

MIT-LCP. Responsible use of mimic data with online ser-vices like gpt, Apr 2023. URL https://physionet. org/news/post/gpt-responsible-use/ .Norman, G. R., Monteiro, S. D., Sherbino, J., Ilgen, J. S., Schmidt, H. G., and Mamede, S. The causes of errors in clinical reasoning: cognitive biases, knowledge deficits, and dual process thinking. Academic Medicine , 92(1): 23–30, 2017. Oh, J., Lee, G., Bae, S., Kwon, J.-m., and Choi, E. Ecg-qa: A comprehensive question answering dataset combined with electrocardiogram. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:66277–66288, 2023a. Oh, J., Lee, G., Bae, S., myoung Kwon, J., and Choi, E. ECG-QA: A comprehensive question answering dataset combined with electrocardiogram. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2023b. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=YWJ7Yi4OtH .OpenAI. Introducing GPT-5.2 — openai.com. https:// openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5-2/ ,2025. [Accessed 12-01-2026]. Park, M., Lim, J., Yu, T., and Joo, S. Semisegecg: A multi-dataset benchmark for semi-supervised semantic segmentation in ecg delineation. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , pp. 5099–5104, 2025. Phan, L., Gatti, A., Han, Z., Li, N., Hu, J., Zhang, H., Zhang, C. B. C., Shaaban, M., Ling, J., Shi, S., et al. Humanity’s last exam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14249 , 2025. Pillai, A., Spathis, D., Nepal, S., Collins, A. C., Mackin, D. M., Heinz, M. V., Griffin, T. Z., Jacobson, N. C., and Campbell, A. Time2lang: Bridging time-series founda-tion models and large language models for health sensing beyond prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07608 ,2025. Shojaee, P., Mirzadeh, S. I., Alizadeh, K., Horton, M., Ben-gio, S., and Farajtabar, M. The illusion of thinking: Un-derstanding the strengths and limitations of reasoning models via the lens of problem complexity. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 2025. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=YghiOusmvw .Team, G., Anil, R., Borgeaud, S., Alayrac, J.-B., Yu, J., Sori-cut, R., Schalkwyk, J., Dai, A. M., Hauth, A., Millican, K., et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , 2023. Wang, B., Yue, X., and Sun, H. Can chatgpt defend its belief in truth? evaluating llm reasoning via debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13160 , 2023. Wang, C., Qi, Q., Wang, J., Sun, H., Zhuang, Z., Wu, J., Zhang, L., and Liao, J. Chattime: A unified multimodal time series foundation model bridging numerical and textual data. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pp. 12694–12702, 2025. Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. Wu, X., Zheng, R., Sha, J., Wu, T.-L., Zhou, H., Tang, M., Chang, K.-W., Peng, N., and Huang, H. Daco: Towards application-driven and comprehensive data analysis via code generation. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 37:90661–90682, 2024. Xie, Z., Li, Z., He, X., Xu, L., Wen, X., Zhang, T., Chen, J., Shi, R., and Pei, D. Chatts: Aligning time series with llms via synthetic data for enhanced understanding and reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03104 , 2024. Yao, Y., Li, Z., and Zhao, H. Beyond chain-of-thought, effective graph-of-thought reasoning in language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16582 , 2023. Ye, J., Zhang, W., Li, Z., Li, J., Zhao, M., and Tsung, F. Medualtime: A dual-adapter language model for medi-cal time series-text multimodal learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06620 , 2024. Yin, P., Li, W.-D., Xiao, K., Rao, A., Wen, Y., Shi, K., Howland, J., Bailey, P., Catasta, M., Michalewski, H., et al. Natural language to code generation in interactive data science notebooks. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 126–173, 2023. Yue, X., Ni, Y., Zhang, K., Zheng, T., Liu, R., Zhang, G., Stevens, S., Jiang, D., Ren, W., Sun, Y., et al. Mmmu: A massive multi-discipline multimodal understanding and reasoning benchmark for expert agi. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 9556–9567, 2024. Zhang, D., Zhoubian, S., Cai, M., Li, F., Yang, L., Wang, W., Dong, T., Hu, Z., Tang, J., and Yue, Y. Datascibench: An llm agent benchmark for data science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13897 , 2025a. Zhang, Y., Jiang, Q., XingyuHan, X., Chen, N., Yang, Y., and Ren, K. Benchmarking data science agents. In Pro-ceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pp. 5677–5700, 2024. 11 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

Zhang, Y., Ayush, K., Qiao, S., Heydari, A. A., Narayan-swamy, G., Xu, M. A., Metwally, A. A., Xu, S., Garrison, J., Xu, X., et al. Sensorlm: Learning the language of wear-able sensors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09108 , 2025b. Zhou, P., Ai, J., Zhao, W., Wang, K., Peng, X., Shao, W., Yao, H., Zhang, K., et al. Mpbench: A comprehensive multimodal reasoning benchmark for process errors iden-tification. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pp. 21586–21606, 2025. 12 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

A. Experiments 

Table 4. Comprehensive Evaluation on MIMIC-IV and ECG-QA. We compare models across four datasets. Metrics are grouped by 

Perception (labeling accuracy), Deduction (retrieval quality), and Original (downstream accuracy). All models are now evaluated across all available tasks. 

Model MIMIC-IV ECG-QA Diagnosis ECG-QA Rhythm ECG-QA Form 

Perception Deduction Orig Perception Deduction Orig Perception Deduction Orig Perception Deduction Orig Mac@50 Mac@100 Micro P@1 P@5 P@10 Acc Mac@50 Mac@100 Micro P@1 P@5 P@10 Acc Mac@50 Mac@100 Micro P@1 P@5 P@10 Acc Mac@50 Mac@100 Micro P@1 P@5 P@10 Acc OpenTSLM 0.63 0.07 0.52 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.01 0.79 0.07 0.62 0.04 0.07 0.07 0.10 0.68 0.09 0.56 0.20 0.21 0.20 0.15 0.74 0.30 0.60 0.14 0.12 0.12 0.12 QoQ-Med 0.55 0.03 0.47 0.11 0.12 0.12 0.14 0.50 0.00 0.46 0.09 0.08 0.09 0.08 0.79 0.25 0.69 0.21 0.19 0.18 0.14 0.75 0.03 0.59 0.12 0.15 0.15 0.13 Claude Array 0.83 0.09 0.66 0.15 0.15 0.16 0.16 0.61 0.02 0.55 0.17 0.17 0.18 0.18 0.73 0.02 0.61 0.22 0.22 0.20 0.15 0.59 0.04 0.53 0.05 0.09 0.12 0.14 Claude Plot 0.61 0.04 0.56 0.22 0.21 0.21 0.22 0.71 0.05 0.59 0.22 0.20 0.20 0.22 0.66 0.03 0.57 0.25 0.25 0.24 0.20 0.56 0.06 0.52 0.18 0.21 0.22 0.21 Gemini Plot 0.74 0.15 0.63 0.32 0.31 0.30 0.33 0.77 0.16 0.67 0.28 0.27 0.27 0.28 0.80 0.16 0.66 0.47 0.48 0.45 0.38 0.74 0.16 0.64 0.28 0.32 0.32 0.39 Perception:  Does the reasoning describe the signal?  Deduction:  Does the reasoning follow the clinical consensus? 

Figure 8. Correlation with Prediction Accuracy. Prior approaches have focused on benchmarking only on Final Classification Accuracy, without explicitly benchmarking the reasoning capability. Deduction is highly correlated to final accuracy, but Perception is not. This discrepancy indicates that high final accuracy does not imply that the model is reasoning correctly on the specific signal features that are present, leading to issues in trustworthiness. 

13 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

B. Adversarial Assessment  

> Table 5. Antonym Mappings used during Adversarial Assessment.

Antonyms Notes 

Wide ↔ Narrow e.g. Wide QRS Elevation ↔ Depression e.g. ST Elevation Regular ↔ Irregular e.g. Regular rhythm Upright ↔ Inverted e.g. Inverted P wave Prolonged ↔ Shortened e.g. Prolonged PR Left ↔ Right e.g. Left axis deviation High ↔ Low e.g. High QRS voltage Poor ↔ Normal e.g. Poor progression 

{Absent, Flat } ↔ { Present, Peak } e.g. P waves absent 

{Fusion, Fused } ↔ { Distinct, Capture } e.g. Fused T waves Sinus Rhythm ↔ Sinus Bradycardia ↔ Sinus Tachycardia ↔ Atrial Fibrillation 

↔ Atrial Flutter ↔ Junctional Rhythm Different heart rate speeds and rhythms. 

C. Knowledge Sources 

The aggregation, parsing, and subsequent release of our structured database are strictly permissible under the open-access frameworks governing these sources. As detailed be;pw, LITFL , Wikipedia , and WikiEM operate under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 or CC BY-SA 4.0, while ECGpedia operates under CC BY-NC 3.0 NL. These Creative Commons licenses explicitly grant permission to ”adapt” (i.e., parse and restructure) and ”share” the underlying content. By releasing our derived database as an open-source asset for non-commercial research with proper attribution, we fully comply with the ShareAlike and 

NonCommercial provisions, ensuring our work respects the legal terms and open-source ethos of the original contributors. Please see copies of the license in our codebase under the folder license/. • LITFL ECG Library: Gold standard for visual ECG recognition and diagnosis, commonly used by cardiologists and electrophysiologists. Licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0, allowing for free adaption and sharing. • Wikipedia: Represents the broadest tier of medical consensus with general definitions and widely accepted standard-of-care descriptions. Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0, allowing for free adaption and sharing. • ECGpedia: A specialized knowledge base dedicated designed for teaching with textbook and course materials. Licensed under CC BY-NC 3.0 NL, allowing for free adaption and sharing. • WikiEM: Focused on Emergency Medicine, this resource captures rapid triage and decision-making protocols. Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0, allowing for free adaption and sharing. 

D. Task Details 

We evaluate on subsets ECG-QA (Oh et al., 2023b) and MIMIC-IV-ECG (Gow et al., 2023). We evaluate on subsets in order to avoid excessive computational expenditure, but we ensure that the subsets are representative and demonstrate the most challenging scenarios. For ECG-QA, we choose to focus on Question Template IDs 8, 10, 11. These questions represent the most difficult questions in ECG-QA, as they are multiple choice with many choices. Most other ECG-QA questions used binary answers. Question 8 was ”What diagnostic symptoms does this ECG show, including uncertain symptoms?” with the below possible answers. [’complete left bundle branch block’, ’complete right bundle branch block’, ’digitalis effect’, ’first degree av block’, ’incomplete left bundle branch block’, ’incomplete right bundle branch block’, ’ischemic in anterior leads’, ’ischemic in anterolateral leads’, ’ischemic in anteroseptal leads’, ’ischemic in inferior leads’, ’ischemic in inferolateral leads’, ’ischemic in lateral leads’, ’left anterior fascicular block’, ’left atrial overload/enlargement’, ’left posterior fascicular block’, ’left ventricular hypertrophy’, ’long qt-interval’, ’myocardial infarction in anterior leads’, ’myocardial infarction in anterolateral leads’, ’myocardial infarction in anteroseptal leads’, ’myocardial infarction in inferior leads’, ’myocardial infarction in 14 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

inferolateral leads’, ’myocardial infarction in inferoposterior leads’, ’myocardial infarction in inferoposterolateral leads’, ’myocardial infarction in lateral leads’, ’myocardial infarction in posterior leads’, ’non-diagnostic t abnormalities’, ’non-specific intraventricular conduction disturbance (block)’, ’non-specific ischemic’, ’non-specific st changes’, ’none’, ’right atrial overload/enlargement’, ’subendocardial injury in anterolateral leads’, ’subendocardial injury in anteroseptal leads’, ’subendocardial injury in inferior leads’, ’subendocardial injury in inferolateral leads’, ’subendocardial injury in lateral leads’] Question 10 was ”What rhythm-related symptoms does this ECG show?” with the below answers. [’atrial fibrillation’, ’atrial flutter’, ’bigeminal pattern (unknown origin, supraventricular, or ventricular)’, ’none’, ’normal functioning artificial pacemaker’, ’sinus arrhythmia’, ’sinus bradycardia’, ’sinus rhythm’, ’sinus tachycardia’, ’supraventricu-lar tachycardia’] Question 11 was ”What form-related symptoms does this ECG show?” with the below answers. [’abnormal qrs’, ’atrial premature complex’, ’digitalis effect’, ’high qrs voltage’, ’inverted t-waves’, ’long qt-interval’, ’low amplitude t-wave’, ’low qrs voltages in the frontal and horizontal leads’, ’non-diagnostic t abnormalities’, ’non-specific st changes’, ’non-specific st depression’, ’non-specific st elevation’, ’non-specific t-wave changes’, ’none’, ’prolonged pr interval’, ’q waves present’, ’t-wave abnormality’, ’ventricular premature complex’, ’voltage criteria (qrs) for left ventricular hypertrophy’] For MIMIC-IV-ECG, we parse out the ICD-10 diagnosis codes from the corresponding cardiologist notes and choose the classes with at least 100 ECGs associated with them, as well as having an overlap in classes with ECG-QA. This gives us these 8 classes for a total of 800 ECGs. [left bundle branch block, supraventricular tachycardia, right bundle branch block, ventricular premature depolarization (pvcs), long qt syndrome, st segment elevation (stemi) myocardial infarction, atrial flutter, atrial fibrillation]  

> Table 6. ICD-10 Codes and Corresponding Diagnoses used in MIMIC-IV evaluation.

ICD-10 Code Diagnosis 

I21.3; I21.3 ST segment elevation (STEMI) myocardial infarction; Acute ST elevation myocardial infarction I48.91 Atrial fibrillation I48.92; I48.4 Atrial flutter; Typical atrial flutter I45.81 Long QT syndrome I47.1 Supraventricular tachycardia I49.3 Ventricular premature depolarization (PVCs) I45.10 Right bundle branch block I44.7 Left bundle branch block 

15 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

E. Incorrect MIMIC-IV-ECG Cardiologist Notes Flagged by ECG ReasonEval Perception Original Cardiologist Report: 

Slight baseline artifact. Atrial fibrillation with a well-controlled overall ventricular rate of 86 beats per minute. Incomplete right bundle-branch block.  ST segment flattening in the limb leads with slight ST segment sagging in leads V4-V6.  Lateral repolarization abnormalities may be secondary to digitalis, but an ongoing ischemic process cannot be excluded. Current rhythm is more irregular and more suggestive of atrial fibrillation with less organized P wave activity 

Figure 9. MIMIC-IV cardiologist note flagged as being incorrect by ECG ReasonEval , and verified to be incorrect by our cardiologists. Team’s note: I don’t agree with the ST changes in the limb leads, I think that’s just artifact. I think it’s ok to say non-specific ST changes in V5 and V6 but it’s submillimeter in many areas so would also be fine to leave it out. The QRS morphology does not look like an incomplete RBBB even though the report says that. 

16 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? Original Cardiologist Report: 

Sinus rhythm. P-R interval prolongation.  Minor ST-T wave abnormalities.  Borderline low voltage. T wave amplitudes in the early precordium are diminished. 

Figure 10. MIMIC-IV cardiologist note flagged as being incorrect by ECG ReasonEval , and verified to be incorrect by our cardiologists. Team’s note: I wouldn’t call minor ST abnormalities. It’s just artifact, or maybe it thinks the TWI are abnormal in V1 and V2, but that can be a normal variant. 

17 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? Original Cardiologist Report: 

Possible ectopic atrial bradycardia.  Short P-R interval  without other signs of pre-excitation. Non-specific intraventricular conduction delay. Poor R wave progression. Non-specific ST-T wave changes. Tracing has baseline artifact. 

Figure 11. MIMIC-IV cardiologist note flagged as being incorrect by ECG ReasonEval , and verified to be incorrect by our cardiologists. Team’s note: PR interval looks normal. 

18 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? Original Cardiologist Report: 

Sinus rhythm. Consider left atrial abnormality.  Voltage criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy. 

Figure 12. MIMIC-IV cardiologist note flagged as being incorrect by ECG ReasonEval , and verified to be incorrect by our cardiologists. Team’s Note: Agreed, does not look like LVH, also don’t see left axis deviation or strain pattern which would be expected with LVH. 

19 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

F. Perception Phase Details 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 

Findings Per Reasoning 

0

50 

100 

150 

200 

250 

300 

350 

> Number of Reasoning Traces

Findings Per Reasoning 

Avg Checks: 2.5 

Figure 13. Number of findings per trace. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

Proportion of Verified Findings per Reasoning 

0

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

> Number of Reasoning Traces

Proportion of Verified Findings per Reasoning 

Average Success: 0.84 

Figure 14. Verified Findings per Trace. 

20 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

Input: reasoning trace Perception Data Science Agent 

System Prompt: You are an ECG analysis expert, Cardiac Electrophysiologist, and a data scientist. 

Input Data: 

• ecg signal (numpy.array) shape (12, 5000): 12-lead 10s ECG, fs=500Hz in this lead order {ecg leads available }.• ecg features dict (Dict[str, Dict]): Pre-computed features extracted from an ECG segmentation algorithm. 

– The dictionary is keyed by lead name (e.g., ’I’, ’V1’). Each value is a dictionary of features for that lead. 

Data Schema and Structure: 

• The inner dictionaries contain ”Scalar Values” (floats) and ”Array Values” (1D NumPy arrays). • Top-Level Keys Available (Leads): [’I’, ’II’, ’III’, ’aVR’, ’aVF’, ’aVL’, ’V1’, ’V2’, ’V3’, ’V4’, ’V5’, ’V6’] • Inner Dictionary Keys (Features): – Scalar Values (float): avg PR interval (msec), avg QRS interval (msec), avg QT interval (msec), avg QTc interval (msec), avg RR interval (msec), avg heart rate (bpm), avg ST segment (msec), avg P peak amp (mv), avg QRS peak amp (mv), avg T peak amp (mv), avg ST deviation (mv) 

– Array Values (np.ndarray[float]): RR intervals (msec) 

– Array Values (np.ndarray[int]): P on idxs, P off idxs, QRS on idxs, QRS off idxs, T on idxs, T off idxs 

Example ecg features dict Construction: 

Below is a runnable code snippet that creates a sample dictionary. It uses a subset of the features listed above but demonstrates the exact data structure you will receive.           

> import numpy as np ecg_features_dict = { 'I': {'avg_QRS_interval_(msec)': 71.0, # Scalar float 'P_on_idxs': np.array([198, 890, 1488, 2500]) #1D NumPy array }, 'II': {'avg_QRS_interval_(msec)': 87.25, 'P_on_idxs': np.array([197, 889, 1488, 2502]) }}

Target Reasoning Trace: {reasoning trace }

Your Task: 

1. Extract Findings (JSON Format): Parse the reasoning trace and extract every specific, verifiable ECG finding. If anything is non-specific, such as ”Artifact is present”, then ignore the finding. Ignore any ”diagnostic” conditions, such as ”Right bundle-branch block”. Focus on rhythm or form properties of the ECG signal. Also, ignore any findings that have to do with a pacemaker, such as ”paced rhythm”. Output this as a JSON Dictionary inside a json code block. Each dictionary must have: key (str): finding name; value (List[str]): exact quotes from the trace. 2. Write Verification Function (Python Format): Write a Python function verify perception(ecg signal, ecg features dict) inside a python 

code block. Return a dictionary findings checks where each key are the specific claims from the JSON dictionary and values are the boolean result. 

Output JSON Format Example:      

> {"Sinus Tachycardia": ["Heart rate is mentioned as >100 bpm"], "ST Elevation in V1": ["there is an ST Elevation in V1..."]}

Output Python Format Function Example:        

> def verify_perception(ecg_signal, ecg_features_dict): import numpy as np findings_checks = {} hr =ecg_features_dict['II']['avg_heart_rate_(bpm)'].mean() findings_checks['Sinus Tachycardia'] = bool(hr > 100) return findings_checks

Figure 15. Verbatim System Prompt Specification for the Perception Verification Agent. 

21 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

Input: error trace Perception Data Science Agent, Debugging 

System Prompt: The previous function execution failed. Please analyze the error trace and fix the verify perception function. 

Your Task: 

1. Analyze the error trace to determine why the code failed (e.g., shape mismatch, invalid key access, logic error). 2. Re-write the full Python function verify perception(ecg signal, ecg features dict) to fix the issue. Explain what the issue was as well. 3. Abstractness Check: If the reasoning trace is truly too abstract to verify with the given data (e.g., requires historical patient data not in the inputs), return ONLY the text "Perception is too abstract: {REASONING }" with REASONING filled out and do not generate code. 

Considerations: 

• Do not infer or add checks for other criteria that might be part of a full diagnostic algorithm unless they are explicitly stated in the reasoning trace. The function must be a direct and literal translation of the text’s claims into code. • Do not put any try-except blocks in the code. If the code is written incorrectly, an error should be thrown to make it clear that the code must be fixed. • Do not add a main function; only return the verify perception function or the ”too abstract” string. 

Error Trace: 

{error trace }

Figure 16. System Prompt for the Debugging Agent. This agent is triggered when the initial code execution fails, tasked with either repairing the Python function or flagging the claim as unverifiable. 

22 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

G. Deduction Phase Details Physician A's Reasoning: 

rsR’, Rsr’, or rSR’ in leads V1-V2 AND (broad S wave in leads I, aVL, V5, V6 OR S wave is > 40ms)  AND QRS interval between 100 and 119ms AND normal R wave peak time in leads V5 and V6 AND R wave peak time > 50 ms in lead V1 

Top-5 Most Similar: 

>> 1. [0.9121] incomplete right bundle branch block  | QRS duration between 110 and 120 ms in adults, between 90 ... 

>> 2. [0.9111] incomplete right bundle branch block  | Incomplete RBBB is defined as an RSR’ pattern in V1-3 with ... 

3. [0.8967] complete right bundle branch block  | duration of the QRS complex on the ECG exceeds 120 ms ... 

4. [0.8952] complete right bundle branch block  | QRS > 0.12 sec; the terminal force of the QRS in V1 is above ... 

>> 5. [0.8939] incomplete right bundle branch block  | Incomplete Right Bundle Branch Block (rSr’pattern).. 

Physician C's Reasoning: 

QRS duration at upper limit of normal or mildly prolonged with classic rSr′ or rsR′ pattern V1–V2 indicating delayed terminal right ventricular activation but QRS not wide enough to qualify as complete RBBB(<120 msec). S waves in I V5 

–V6 may be slightly broadened & repolarization changes mostly absent. Axis typically normal with the key feature being terminal R′ in right precordial leads without fully widened QRS 

## Label: Incomplete Right Bundle Branch Block 

Top-5 Most Similar: 

>> 1. [0.9640] incomplete right bundle branch block  | QRS wave duration between 100 and 120 ms; rsr, rsR, or rSR ... 

>> 2. [0.9504] incomplete right bundle branch block  | QRS wave duration between 100 and 120 ms; rsr, rsR, or rSR ... 

3. [0.9427] complete right bundle branch block  | QRS Complex is Wide >= 120 ms in leads V1, V2, I, V6; QRS ... 

>> 4. [0.9426] incomplete right bundle branch block  | QRS Complex is Wide >= 100 ms and < 120 ms in leads V1, ... 

>> 5. [0.9416] incomplete right bundle branch block  | QRS Complex is Wide >= 110 ms and <= 120 ms in leads V1, ... 

Physician B's Reasoning: 

QRS 0.10-0.11 seconds. RBBB-like morphology not meeting criteria for complete RBBB. 

Top-5 Most Similar: 

1. [0.8904] incomplete left bundle branch block  | Incomplete LBBB is diagnosed when typical LBBB morphology ... 

2. [0.8902] incomplete left bundle branch block  | Left bundle branch block, incomplete (iLBBB)... 

>> 3. [0.8898] incomplete right bundle branch block  | Incomplete RBBB; Incomplete RBBB is defined by QRS ... 

>> 4. [0.8877] incomplete right bundle branch block  | Incomplete RBBB is defined as an RSR’ pattern in V1-3 with ... 

>> 5. [0.8840] incomplete right bundle branch block  | Incomplete Right Bundle Branch Block (rSr’pattern)... 

Figure 17. Example of our Deduction Pipeline. This example is how we validate our deduction, where we embed the Physician’s reasoning, then compare it against our database to find the Top-k most similar diagnostic criteria. Here, for Incomplete Right Bundle Block, we are able to consistently get at least 3 database entries on IRBBB based on the phsyician’s definition, despite each definition being so differnetly framed. In particular, Physician B is very short, and doesnt even describe what RBBB is in it, just that IRBBB is not RBBB, but yet, we are still able to identify IRBBB articles. During inference, instead of a physician reasoning being used as input, the evaluated model’s generated reasoning is used and compared to our database. 

23 How Well Do Multimodal Models Reason on ECG Signals? 

Input: raw text , diagnosis Text Cleaning Agent, Quotes 

System Prompt: You are an Expert Medical Data Extractor. Your goal is to identify every distinct Diagnostic Pattern, Class, or Criteria Group from an ECG signal associated with {diagnosis } from the input text below. The input text is scraped from online resources on ECGs, so not all of the information may be useful or relevant to {diagnosis }.

CRITICAL INSTRUCTION: STRICT RELEVANCE 

• Strict Association: Must be diagnostic criteria associated with {diagnosis }.• No Matches: If the provided input text does NOT contain specific diagnostic criteria for {diagnosis }, you must return an empty list for ”diagnostic clusters”. • Do Not Hallucinate: Do not use outside medical knowledge to fill in gaps. Only extract what is present in the provided text. • Handling Types and Variants: Extract EACH ”Type” (e.g., Type 1) or ”Pattern” (e.g., Coved vs. Saddleback) as a separate group, even if noted as ”non-diagnostic”. 

GROUPING LOGIC 

1. Explicit Types/Classes: Each explicit label (e.g., ”Classic Form”) defines a separate group. 2. ”OR” Logic: If the text implies ”Diagnosis is made by finding A... OR by finding B”, these are separate groups. 3. Morphological Variants: If the text describes alternative shapes (e.g., ”instead of X, you see Y”), treat them as separate groups. 

EXTRACTION RULES & EXCLUSION CRITERIA 

• Verbatim Extraction: Extract the EXACT phrases. Do not paraphrase. • Ignore Genetic/Etiological Lists: Do NOT create groups for lists of mutations (e.g., SCN5A) UNLESS the text provides a distinct set of clinical criteria specific to that gene. • Ignore non-specific criteria: Ignore criteria not specific to {diagnosis }.

INPUT TEXT: 

{raw text }

OUTPUT FORMAT (Valid Raw JSON Only): 

> { "diagnostic_clusters": [ {"concept_label": "Type 1 (Coved Pattern)", "criteria": ["Coved ST segment elevation >2mm"] }]}

Figure 18. System Prompt Specification for the Medical Knowledge Extraction Agent. This agent distills unstructured medical literature into structured diagnostic clusters for cross-verification against perception-level findings. 

Input: raw text , diagnosis Text Cleaning Agent, Structured 

System Prompt: You are an Expert ECG Data Standardizer. Your goal is to extract diagnostic criteria for {diagnosis } from the input text and rewrite them using a 

Strict Controlled Vocabulary Template .

STANDARDIZATION RULES 

1. Strict Template: Rewrite every criterion using this structure: [Feature] is [Morphology] [Operator] [Value][Unit] in leads [Leads] .2. Standardize Logic: Convert ”greater than” to >, ”at least” to >= . Convert time to ms and amplitude to mm .3. Expand Leads: Convert group names (e.g., ”inferior leads”) to specific leads (e.g., ”II, III, aVF”). 4. Relevance Check: Extract criteria ONLY if they are specific to {diagnosis }.

INPUT TEXT: 

{raw text }

OUTPUT FORMAT (Valid Raw JSON Only):  

> { "diagnostic_clusters": [ {"concept_label": "Type 1", "criteria": [ "ST Segment is Elevated > 2mm in leads V1, V2" ]}]}

Figure 19. System Prompt Specification for the ECG Data Standardization Agent. This agent enforces a controlled vocabulary and lead-expansion logic to ensure extraction results are machine-verifiable against numeric features. 

24