Title: Investigating Gender Stereotypes in Large Language Models via Social Determinants of Health

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.09416v1

Published Time: Wed, 11 Mar 2026 00:55:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Investigating Gender Stereotypes in Large Language Models via Social Determinants of Health 

Trung Hieu Ngo 1 Adrien Bazoge 2

Solen Quiniou 1 Pierre-Antoine Gourraud 2 Emmanuel Morin 1 

> 1

Nantes Université, École Centrale Nantes, CNRS, LS2N, UMR 6004, F-44000 Nantes, France  

> 2

Nantes Université, CHU Nantes, Clinique des données, INSERM, CIC 1413, Nantes, France 

{firstname.lastname}@univ-nantes.fr {firstname.lastname}@chu-nantes.fr 

Abstract 

Large Language Models (LLMs) excel in Natu-ral Language Processing (NLP) tasks, but they often propagate biases embedded in their train-ing data, which is potentially impactful in sen-sitive domains like healthcare. While existing benchmarks evaluate biases related to individ-ual social determinants of health (SDoH) such as gender or ethnicity, they often overlook inter-actions between these factors and lack context-specific assessments. This study investigates bias in LLMs by probing the relationships be-tween gender and other SDoH in French patient records. Through a series of experiments, we found that embedded stereotypes can be probed using SDoH input and that LLMs rely on em-bedded stereotypes to make gendered decisions, suggesting that evaluating interactions among SDoH factors could usefully complement exist-ing approaches to assessing LLM performance and bias. 

1 Introduction 

LLMs are increasingly being explored for the task of supporting medical diagnosis via leveraging clin-ical records, which encompass medical examina-tions, patient histories, and biological data (Raile, 2024). However, these models inherently reflect and amplify the stereotypical biases present in their training data (Bender et al., 2021; Anthis et al., 2025), potentially causing representational or al-locational harms (Barocas et al., 2017). In the medical context, such biases can lead to harmful consequences, including possible misdiagnoses, in-appropriate treatments, and the reinforcement of health disparities (Omiye et al., 2023), as illus-trated in Figure 1. Assumptions about a patient’s gender and occupation might influence generated texts and further allocational harms via long-term influences on users, as demonstrated in the experi-ments by Vicente and Matute (2023). While prior research has investigated biases in LLMs using en-tire patient records, less attention has been given 

Figure 1: A sample of input data override in a diagnosis task. Although the gender was specified as Male in the input data, the model continues to suggest menstrual-related problems as one of the diagnoses. 

to individual components of these records, partic-ularly SDoH. SDoH are the conditions in which people live, work, and age, encompassing both socio-economic factors (e.g., employment, educa-tion, family support) and behavioural patterns (e.g., substance use, physical activity), which can signif-icantly influence health outcomes (Merino et al., 2013). Because SDoH often provide a general and subjective representation of a person’s life circum-stances, they are particularly susceptible to societal and cultural stereotypes, making them a potential source of stereotypical bias in LLMs. Despite their central role in clinical decision-making, SDoH remain underexplored in the bias analysis of LLMs. Existing general studies on LLM biases (Li et al. (2020); Parrish et al. (2022); Nadeem et al. (2021); Ducel et al. (2024); Kumar et al. (2025)) typically examine isolated determi-nants that are also SDoH in a decontextualized envi-ronment without considering interactions between different SDoH, as noted by Kirk et al. (2021). Recent research on bias in the medical domain (Omiye et al., 2023; Zack et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Poulain et al., 2024; Ducel et al., 2025) be-gan to analyze the bias of LLMs in clinical tasks using the same approach of isolated determinants 

> arXiv:2603.09416v1 [cs.CL] 10 Mar 2026

in a decontextualized environment. In this work, we investigate gender stereotypes, a specific type of bias, to examine how LLMs encode and repre-sent SDoH compared to human judgment, by using SDoH information in anonymized patient clinical notes. By focusing on this type of bias, we aim to shed light on the nuanced ways in which LLMs may perpetuate or distort social stereotypes in clin-ical contexts. Our contributions include: (i) a gen-der stereotypes probing framework utilizing SDoH data from patient record datasets to examine inter-actions between gender and 13 other SDoH, which is adaptable to different languages and patient pop-ulations; (ii) an analysis of interactions between gender and influential SDoH, most notably Occu-pation; (iii) a comparison of models’ predictions with human annotators’ judgments. 

2 Methodology 

2.1 Task Motivation and Definition 

This study investigates the use of patient clinical notes in French, with SDoH information as input to evaluate gender stereotypes in LLMs via the task of gender prediction (Appendix B). The motivation is simple: given the same set of SDoH information, humans may infer a gender differently based on their experiences. For example, a married person who works as a salesperson in a market may be perceived as likely female by one person and male by another person, based on their previous encoun-ters and experiences. If we regard these inferences as a gender stereotype in a human, then can we investigate the same stereotype in an LLM? LLMs are tasked with processing the gender-neutralized SDoH information and providing a gen-der prediction on a 7-point Likert scale (Joshi et al., 2015), with confidence granularity ranging from “1 - female” to “4 - uncertain” to “7 - male”. The de-tailed scale is reported in the prompt (Appendix C), which combines both the prediction and the con-fidence level into a single value, with a larger dis-tance to the value 4 being a higher confidence level in the prediction. The choice of a Likert scale as output allows the task to be framed as a regres-sion task, which permits the use of regression met-rics for evaluation. There have been no studies on the preference for range in a point-wise evalu-ation format; however, we chose the 7-point scale to ensure a certain level of granularity. This experi-mental design hypothesizes that, given the absence of explicit linguistic gender cues in the input, pre-dictions deviating from the neutral score of 4 may indicate reliance on gender stereotypes. Model bias is quantified by measuring the deviation of predic-tion trends from the neutral value of 4, revealing the extent of stereotypic gender associations em-bedded within the LLM. We deliberately avoided logit-based evaluation to ensure applicability to closed-source models as well. The probing task is artificial by design, allowing controlled isolation and measurement of stereotypes. While artificial, we highlighted the connection to potential down-stream harm in Figure 1, where intrinsic gender bias in a model could lead to an incorrect diagnosis for a patient. 

2.2 Data Dataset We used a dataset of 1,700 anonymized social history sections from clinical notes collected at a French University Hospital (Karakachoff et al., 2024), annotated with 14 SDoH (gender, living status, marital status, descendants, employment status, occupation, tobacco use, alcohol use, drug use, housing, education, physical activity, income, and ethnicity/country of birth) (Bazoge et al., 2025). These annotations are detailed in Appendix A. To enable robust gender prediction and explore the relationship between gender and SDoH, we filtered the dataset to include only those with information on at least three SDoH and occupation-related data. This process yielded 958 clinical notes for use as input data, with a gender distribution of 52% males and 48% females. 

Gender Neutralization To mitigate the influence of linguistic gender markers in French texts, which could inadvertently provide gender cues, we pre-processed the clinical notes. SDoH annotations en-abled the extraction of relevant information, trans-forming text into structured key-value pairs for each SDoH per patient. To ensure gender neutral-ity, values for each SDoH category were converted automatically to binary options (Yes/No) or man-ually neutralized to eliminate overt gender indica-tors in the case of span-only SDoH. For instance, occupations were represented inclusively (e.g., “ in-firmier/infirmière ” (male nurse/female nurse) in-stead of just “ infirmière ” (nurse). These inclusive forms were selected by consensus among three French annotators after discussion of each occupa-tion and reference to the inclusive forms provided in the 2020 Professions and Socio-Professional Cat-egories (PCS-2020) nomenclature by France’s Na-tional Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE). This approach prioritized neutralizing gendered information, accepting potential informa-tion loss as a trade-off. A sample of the transformed structured input, both in French and English, is presented in Appendix B. Further analysis of the neutralization process is reported in the Discussion section. 

2.3 Models Model choice For this study, we focused on a total of 9 LLMs of varying sizes and opti-mized for instruction-following. We prioritized open-source models for their suitability for on-premise deployment in hospital settings which is important for preserving patient privacy, but our framework works with closed-source models as well. The chosen models are: Llama-3.1-8b-Instruct and Llama-3.3-70b-Instruct (AI@Meta, 2024), Qwen2.5-Instruct 7B and 72B (Yang et al., 2025), and Mistral-v0.3-Instruct and Mistral-Small-24b-Instruct-2501 (Jiang et al., 2023). These 6 models are chosen for the presence of French in their pretraining data, their capability in instruction-following, their similar time of release, as well as their capability of deploying locally on-site. We tested the latest versions of the models for the small (7b) and large (70b) sizes, except Mistral, due to a lack of models for the 70b size. We also chose 3 fine-tuned models adapted to the medical domain: OpenBioLLM (Pal and Sankarasubbu, 2024) and Med42 (Christophe et al., 2024) from Llama3-70b, and HuatuoGPT (Wang et al., 2025) from Qwen2.5-72b. 

Models prompting To ensure that only input data influenced model predictions, all models were given the same prompt, as detailed in Appendix C. Various formats of the prompt were tested, and the chosen format was the most suitable in terms of en-suring stability in the outputs based on preliminary testing with the three families of general LLMs. For consistency, all models used identical decoding parameters during generation: top-k of 100, top-p of 0.9, and temperature of 1.0. Predictions were ex-tracted from generated texts using regex matching, with manual verification to confirm accuracy. Each model was evaluated three times, with reported results representing the average of the three runs. 

2.4 Evaluation and Analysis Methods Gender Bias Measurement Model bias is quan-tified by assessing the deviation of prediction trends from the neutral Likert scale value of 4. A modified Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) metric is em-ployed to measure this deviation, assigning greater weight to predictions with higher confidence while maintaining alignment with the original scale of prediction values. The RMSE is adjusted by in-corporating the sign of the Mean Absolute Error (MAE), which indicates the direction of bias to-ward either gender. This results in a bias score that captures both the magnitude and direction of gen-der bias in LLMs, with negative scores reflecting a bias toward the Female gender and positive scores indicating a bias toward the Male gender. 

Association between Gendered Predictions and SDoH Prior research has shown that workplace gender segregation, driven by societal stereotypes linking genders to specific roles, is often reflected and amplified in generated texts (Kirk et al., 2021). We aim to identify similar relationships between gender and other SDoH through an association anal-ysis. Model predictions were binarized into Female (Likert values 1-3) vs non-Female (Likert values 4-7); and Male (Likert values 5-7) vs non-Male (Lik-ert values 1-4) categories. Fisher’s exact tests were then performed for all previously identified influen-tial SDoH. For Occupation, neutralized occupation names were grouped into six socio-professional categories based on the PCS-2020 nomenclature from INSEE (INSEE, 2024), with an additional group called Homemakers. Fisher’s exact tests report the odds ratio for cases where binary val-ues of SDoH and predictions coincide; therefore, we modified the calculation to evaluate the cases where both the values of the SDoH and the predic-tion are True, with the significance threshold for p-values of 0.05 in the normal format or 1.3 in the -log10 format. The odds ratio values with p-values that pass this threshold suggest statistically signifi-cant associations between SDoH in LLMs’ internal mechanisms in the task of gender prediction. 

3 Experiments and Results 

3.1 Gender Stereotype Evaluation 

Figure 2 reports the distributions of predictions for all models, and Figure 3 condenses these pre-dictions into the degree and direction of gender stereotypes in nine models for the task of gender Figure 2: Averaged number of occurrences for each predicted class across 3 runs for each model. Error bars indicate Standard Deviation values. 

> Figure 3: Modified RMSE scores for 9 models, denoting the deviation from the neutral value of 4. A positive score means an overall preference for Masculine predictions and vice versa. Larger absolute values show higher bias degrees.

prediction using SDoH, averaged over three runs per model. The modified RMSE scores were com-puted under consistent generation settings, exhibit-ing stability with standard deviations below 0.01 across three runs for all models. Key observations include: • The bias score metric captures each model’s overall prediction tendency. For instance, Llama-3.1-8B’s high score of 2.25 indicates a confident and consistent bias toward mas-culine predictions, whereas Llama-3.3-70B’s lower score of 1.65 suggests a more nuanced but still predominantly masculine bias. • Smaller model variants generally exhibit greater confidence in gender predictions, sug-gesting a stronger reliance on gender stereo-types compared to their larger counterparts. This increased bias may stem from the lim-ited capacity of smaller models to process in-put data, attributable to their lower parameter counts. • In general, both variants within a model fam-ily display consistent gender prediction ten-dencies, as shown in the small difference in modified RMSE scores, except for the Mis-tral models. This discrepancy may arise from differences in architecture or training data be-tween Mistral-v0.3 and Mistral-Small, possi-bly the vocabulary size. Mistral-v0.3 has a significantly smaller vocabulary (32,768 to-kens) compared to Mistral-Small (131,072), the Llama models (128,256), and the Qwen models (152,064). This finding aligns with re-cent studies on the impact of vocabulary size on model performance, such as in Tao et al. (2024); Huang et al. (2025). • The medically-adapted models follow the same prediction tendencies as the base mod-els, but with a slightly higher degree of bias. This observation aligns with the discussions put out by Anthis et al. (2025) and Lum et al. (2025) that models need to be evaluated in specific contexts, as large models adapted to medical data in our experiment are behav-ing with a higher level of bias than the base versions. Consequently, the elevated bias in large adapted models raises concerns about po-tentially greater bias in their smaller adapted counterparts, which tend to exhibit more er-ratic behavior. These findings indicate that the modified RMSE score can detect gender stereotypes across models, independent of architectural variations, suggesting its applicability to both open- and closed-source models. 

3.2 Interpreting the prediction tendencies 

The previous results showed that the modified RMSE score can capture the gender prediction ten-dencies of LLMs from SDoH in a single value. This raises another question: We now know the general tendency of predictions, but can we un-derstand why models made these gendered predic-tions? For instance, the bias scores of Qwen2.5-7b and Qwen2.5-72b showed a high tendency to avoid gendered predictions, but we do not know if they ar-rived at these decisions using the same information. Intuitively, we can say that Occupation, Marital status, and Substance usage have associations with Gender based on our actual experiences, but can we say the same for LLMs? A SDoH option is associated with a gendered prediction when the presence of the feature in-creases the probability of the gendered prediction. To assert that there is an association, we look at the odds ratio and p-values from one-tailed Fisher’s ex-act test. The full results for SDoH options and Pro-fession groups are reported in the Figure 4 and Fig-ure 5. We report odds ratios to quantify association strength, with statistical significance determined using p < 0.05 (or -log10(p) > 1.3) to reject the null hypothesis of the two True values co-occurring by chance. In the visualization, color intensity rep-resents the higher values for -log10(p), while as-terisks indicate statistical significance. Odds ratio values below 1.0 (negative associations) are omit-ted for visual clarity. The association heatmaps provide a clearer understanding of gender stereotypes concerning SDoH. Employment status shows consistent cross-model patterns with positive associations between "Retired" - Male (from 1.31 to 2.95) and "Student" - Female (higher than 5.84). Tobacco and Alcohol use consistently associate with Male predictions across multiple models (from 1.02 to 3.19), but not with Female predictions. Marital status - Mar-ried/In relationship is highly influential, but only for Qwen2.5-7B. Regarding Profession groups, most models show a strong association between Male predictions and the Workers group (from 1.36 to 17.64) and between Female predictions and the Employees group (from 1.58 to 7.97). Most models also associate Male predictions with the Agricul-ture workers group and Female predictions with the Homemaker group. These patterns can be seen as the recorded “stereotypes” between gender and other SDoH in models, which helped a model pre-dict a gender from neutralized input data. Certain models stand out in this association study. Mistral-v0.3-7B deviates notably from other models by having different gender stereo-type patterns and prediction tendencies. In contrast, Llama3.1-8B and Llama3.3-70B show minimal de-viation between versions, consistent with the sim-ilar gender bias levels reported by the modified RMSE score. The Qwen2.5 models underscore the influence of model size: with the same training data Figure 4: Heatmap of associations between SDoH options and the Male (left) and Female (right) predictions for nine models. Odds ratio values are reported in the cells. Color intensity indicates probability. Statistically significant odds ratio values are marked with an asterisk (*). 

and model architecture, the smaller version records stereotypes differently from the larger one, suggest-ing that parameter count affects how demographic patterns are encoded and retrieved. 

3.3 Investigating stereotype similarities between models and humans 

Our experiment has probed LLMs for embedded gender stereotypes, revealing both prediction ten-dencies and recorded biases. As this methodology is model-agnostic, we explored its applicability to both human annotators and LLMs by conducting an annotation campaign involving nine college-aged participants in a French university with different backgrounds (gender and nationality). The task was carried out on a random subset of 50 male and 50 female examples from the dataset. Analysis identified two distinct annotator groups: those rely-ing on stereotypes for decision-making (annotators 2, 6, 7, 8, 9) and those favoring neutral judgments (annotators 1, 3, 4, 5). The tendencies of annota-tors’ predictions are presented in Figure 6. The modified RMSE scores are reported in Appendix E. The goal of this component was not to make broad claims about human stereotypes, but rather to serve as a proof-of-concept demonstrating that our frame-work can be applied to both LLMs and humans to reveal stereotype patterns. These findings suggest that the framework can be applied to examine gen-der stereotypes in humans, with prediction patterns varying among annotators even within a group with similar educational backgrounds. Notably, association analysis revealed similari-ties between annotators and LLMs across the same 100 examples. As shown in Figure 7, for Occupa-tion, annotators exhibited significant associations between Male predictions and the Workers and Ar-tisans/Merchants/Business Leaders groups, while models showed similar stereotypes but at a slightly lower level of association. Among the medically-adapted models, Med42 has a stronger level of association, while OpenBioLLM has a weaker de-gree of association when compared to Llama3.3, suggesting the potential influence of adaptation datasets on the level of bias in models. For Fe-male predictions, both annotators and models dis-played associations with Employees and Home-makers groups. For other SDoH (detailed in Ap-pendix F), both groups associated male predictions with past tobacco or alcohol consumption, single or widowed status, and retirement, whereas living with others was linked to female predictions. These Figure 5: Heatmap of associations between Profession groups and the Male (left) and Female (right) predictions for nine models. Odds ratio values are reported in the cells. Color intensity indicates probability. Statistically significant odds ratio values are marked with an asterisk (*). 

> Figure 6: Prediction tendencies of 9 annotators.

parallels suggest that, in gender prediction from SDoH, both models and humans draw on shared social stereotypes. 

4 Discussion 

Our experiments demonstrate the feasibility of de-tecting gender stereotypes in LLMs by examining interactions between SDoH and gender. These in-teractions revealed parallels between human and model-based patterns of social gender stereotypes. The approach can be applied to similarly annotated datasets of patient reports containing SDoH infor-mation, and therefore can be flexibly applied to different systems of Electronic Health Records in French. For other languages, the neutralisation pro-cess can be adapted if the language is gendered. While Gallegos et al. (2024) and Lum et al. (2025) argued that intrinsic evaluations are unrelated to the actual downstream task in the medical field, our results suggest that such evaluations can provide Figure 7: Association heatmap between Profession groups and Male (top) and Female (bottom) predictions of LLMs and annotators on 100 examples. Odds ratio values are reported in the cells. Color intensity indicates probability. Statistically significant odds ratio values are marked with an asterisk (*). 

useful insights into improving LLM performance on those tasks. Unlike generic probing in a decon-textualized environment, our methodology employs anonymized patient reports to situate models within a medical context to observe the potential “over-rides” that models can introduce while processing patient information due to their recorded stereo-types. Ducel et al. (2024) highlights LLMs’ ten-dency to override prompted genders, which could potentially impact medical decisions should LLMs be employed to assist practitioners. Our frame-work provides decision-makers with a measure of potential stereotypes across any LLM, complement-ing other performance evaluations. However, we were not yet able to address the influence of differ-ent SDoH combinations on model predictions, but this will be a priority in future work, along with investigating stereotypes related to other SDoH cat-egories. Our decision to neutralize the patient informa-tion was driven by the presence of linguistic gender markers in French texts. To assess the information loss by neutralization, we conducted an additional experiment using 100 examples, comparing pre-dictions made with different formats: the full text, filtered text (sentences containing SDoH informa-tion only), extracted SDoH data, and neutralized SDoH data (Appendix D). We hypothesized that significant information loss would result in lower modified RMSE scores for textual formats, with reduced scores where linguistic gender markers are available. Table 1 presents the modified RMSE scores across these input formats for Llama and Qwen models.                        

> Models Full Filtered Extracted Neutr. text text SDoH SDoH
> Llama3.1-8b 2.51 2.54 2.60 2.25 Llama3.3-70b 2.48 2.48 2.35 1.56 Qwen2.5-7b 2.34 2.35 2.35 0.97 Qwen2.5-72b 1.88 1.89 1.85 0.96
> Table 1: Modified RMSE scores for different input data formats, tested on 100 examples.

The results indicate that bias scores remain rel-atively stable across input format variations, with significant reductions observed only when linguis-tic gender markers are removed. This suggests that models predominantly rely on these markers rather than SDoH content for gender prediction, validat-ing the neutralization approach. Additionally, we tested a prompting strategy, instructing models to predict genders while explicitly directing them to ignore linguistic gender markers. For the Llama model, approximately 80% of responses refused to follow instructions, with 15% yielding “uncertain” and 5% “male” predictions; for the Qwen model, all responses were “uncertain.” These findings sug-gest that models with high instruction-following capabilities could mitigate the impact of embed-ded stereotypes in downstream tasks, and a tailored prompt could be an interesting strategy to mitigate bias directly in the use case. Our experiments examined gender stereotypes in LLMs, representing an initial step toward a more comprehensive evaluation of stereotypes em-bedded in LLMs concerning all SDoH. However, evaluating even one type of stereotype reveals the complexity of comprehensively characterizing bias in LLMs. This raises a further question: What should we reasonably expect from LLMs regarding bias in medical contexts? Our findings indicate that even seemingly neutral LLMs of large size embed gender stereotypes comparable to human biases, posing hidden potential risks in medical decision-making. With the current research land-scape, we share the belief that it’s not yet possible to achieve entirely unbiased LLMs (Anthis et al., 2025; Rabonato and Berton, 2025). In an ideal world, we would prefer a completely unbiased and 

highly capable LLM as an advisor to medical prac-titioners, but in reality, LLMs are probabilistic in nature and derive their capacity from unbalanced training data to make educated guesses of the next tokens. What they were trained on are the "shad-ows on a wall inside a cave", a replication of hu-mans’ experiences in multimodal formats on the Internet, thus are limited by their very nature and might not be able to match our expectations. Do-main adaptation further complicates the picture, as different adaptation datasets induce different levels of stereotype associations. Therefore, a pragmatic trade-off between performance and bias mitigation is necessary: prioritizing models that are tailored for specific medical tasks and exhibit neutrality at least on par with humans, albeit with potentially reduced capacity. Prompting strategies may offer a viable, cost-effective, and tailored solution to miti-gate the identified biases in chosen LLMs. While biases persist as a concern in medical domains, systematic identification and mitigation of risks can facilitate safer integration of these models by end users. However, it is the responsibility of the model developers to take these potential biases into account when creating training datasets or intro-ducing bias mitigation techniques during the model development process. 

5 Conclusion 

This study proposed a model-agnostic framework for probing gender stereotypes in LLMs using neutralized SDoH data from anonymized patient records, which is applicable to similar Electronic Health Record datasets in different languages. The gender bias evaluation using SDoH revealed that while larger models are more stable and record fewer stereotypes, the adaptation process might further increase the risk of bias in the generated texts. Through association analysis, our study iden-tified variations in gender stereotypes across mod-els, with Occupation emerging as a key influencer of bias, as evidenced by the modified RMSE scores and the statistically significant associations. The comparison with human annotators revealed a sim-ilar reliance on social gender stereotypes, espe-cially evident in the stereotypes between Profes-sion groups and Gender. These findings suggest that probing for embedded stereotypes between SDoH is a potential complement to the evaluation of LLM performance in specialized domains and in specific locations, and future research can explore a more comprehensive approach to measure the level of embedded stereotypes for all SDoH in LLMs for a specific use case in the medical setting. 

Limitations 

This study has several limitations that warrant con-sideration. First, the human evaluation campaign involved nine annotators at higher education levels, which may not have revealed a more diverse varia-tion of gender stereotypes. A more diverse set of annotators will be an interesting addition for the fu-ture. Second, we acknowledge that each model may perform better with a specific prompt, but including different variations of prompts may introduce new disturbances in the context and defeat the point of the probing. Third, we understand the compound effect of SDoH combinations on Gender prediction may have an influence on the predictions, but it is not within the scope of this study and is an interest-ing future direction. Fourth, the study focused on French patient records from one university hospital in France, so the results are particular to this popu-lation of patients, but the methodology is intended to be applicable to the same type of data in different languages, with certain modifications on the neu-tralisation process. These limitations underscore opportunities for future work. Data Consent 

The health data warehouse of the participating uni-versity hospital was approved by the French author-ity of data protection ( Commission Nationale de l’Informatique et des Libertés ) (Registration code n°920242). This study complies with French reg-ulatory and General Data Protection Regulation requirements, including informed consent. The use of the dataset was authorized by the internal ethics review board of the participating university hospital. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was financially supported, in part, by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) MALADES under contract ANR-23-IAS1-0005 and Capacités under the contract BPI PARTAGES: 2025-CAP-SATT-16936. This project was pro-vided with computing AI and storage resources by GENCI at CINES/IDRIS, thanks to the grants 2023-A0161014871 and 2024-AD011015903 on the su-percomputer Jean Zay/Adastra’s A100/MI250x par-titions. 

References 

AI@Meta. 2024. Llama 3 model card. Jacy Reese Anthis, Kristian Lum, Michael Ekstrand, Avi Feller, and Chenhao Tan. 2025. The impossibility of fair llms. Association for Computational Linguistics ,63:105–120. Solon Barocas, Kate Crawford, Aaron Shapiro, and Hanna Wallach. 2017. The problem with bias: Al-locative versus representational harms in machine learning. In 9th Annual conference of the special in-terest group for computing, information and society ,page 1. New York, NY. Adrien Bazoge, Pacôme Constant dit Beaufils, Mo-hammed Hmitouch, Romain Bourcier, Emmanuel Morin, Richard Dufour, Béatrice Daille, Pierre-Antoine Gourraud, and Matilde Karakachoff. 2025. Improving social determinants of health documenta-tion in french electronic health records using large language models. Scientific Reports , 15(1):45427. Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM confer-ence on fairness, accountability, and transparency ,pages 610–623. Clément Christophe, Praveen K Kanithi, Tathagata Raha, Shadab Khan, and Marco AF Pimentel. 2024. Med42-v2: A suite of clinical llms. Fanny Ducel, Nicolas Hiebel, Olivier Ferret, Karën Fort, and Aurélie Névéol. 2025. " women do not have heart attacks!" gender biases in automatically generated clinical cases in french. In Annual Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics .Fanny Ducel, Aurélie Névéol, and Karën Fort. 2024. “you’ll be a nurse, my son!” automatically assessing gender biases in autoregressive language models in french and italian. Language Resources and Evalua-tion , pages 1–29. Isabel O. Gallegos, Ryan A. Rossi, Joe Barrow, Md Mehrab Tanjim, Sungchul Kim, Franck Dernon-court, Tong Yu, Ruiyi Zhang, and Nesreen K. Ahmed. 2024. Bias and Fairness in Large Language Models: A Survey. Computational Linguistics , 50(3):1097– 1179. Hongzhi Huang, Defa Zhu, Banggu Wu, Yutao Zeng, Ya Wang, Qiyang Min, and Xun Zhou. 2025. Over-tokenized transformer: Vocabulary is generally worth scaling. INSEE. 2024. PCS 2020: Professions and Socio-Professional Categories. Accessed: 2025-07-23. Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-laume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, and 1 others. 2023. Mistral 7b. Preprint , arXiv:2310.06825. Ankur Joshi, Saket Kale, Satish Chandel, and D Kumar Pal. 2015. Likert scale: Explored and explained. 

British journal of applied science & technology ,7(4):396. Matilde Karakachoff, Thomas Goronflot, Sandrine Coudol, Delphine Toublant, Adrien Bazoge, Pacôme Constant Dit Beaufils, Emilie Varey, Christophe Leux, Nicolas Mauduit, Matthieu Wargny, and 1 oth-ers. 2024. Implementing a biomedical data ware-house from blueprint to bedside in a regional french university hospital setting: Unveiling processes, over-coming challenges, and extracting clinical insight. 

JMIR Medical Informatics , 12(1):e50194. Hannah Rose Kirk, Yennie Jun, Filippo Volpin, Haider Iqbal, Elias Benussi, Frederic Dreyer, Aleksandar Shtedritski, and Yuki Asano. 2021. Bias out-of-the-box: An empirical analysis of intersectional occupa-tional biases in popular generative language models. 

Advances in neural information processing systems ,34:2611–2624. Charaka Vinayak Kumar, Ashok Urlana, Gopichand Kanumolu, Bala Mallikarjunarao Garlapati, and Pruthwik Mishra. 2025. No llm is free from bias: A comprehensive study of bias evaluation in large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2503.11985. Tao Li, Daniel Khashabi, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sab-harwal, and Vivek Srikumar. 2020. UNQOVERing stereotyping biases via underspecified questions. In Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 3475–3489, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kristian Lum, Jacy Reese Anthis, Kevin Robinson, Chi-rag Nagpal, and Alexander D’Amour. 2025. Bias in language models: Beyond trick tests and towards ruted evaluation. Association for Computational Lin-guistics , 63:137–161. B. Merino, P. Campos, M. Santaolaya, A. Gil, J. Vega, and T. Swift. 2013. Integration of social determi-nants of health and equity into health strategies, pro-grammes and activities: health equity training pro-cess in spain. Technical Report 9 (Case studies), World Health Organization, Geneva. Moin Nadeem, Anna Bethke, and Siva Reddy. 2021. StereoSet: Measuring stereotypical bias in pretrained language models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5356–5371, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jesutofunmi A. Omiye, Jenna C. Lester, Simon Spichak, Veronica Rotemberg, and Roxana Daneshjou. 2023. Large language models propagate race-based medicine. npj Digital Medicine , 6(1):1–4. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. Ankit Pal and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. 2024. Openbiollms: Advancing open-source large language models for healthcare and life sci-ences. https://huggingface.co/aaditya/ OpenBioLLM-Llama3-70B .Alicia Parrish, Angelica Chen, Nikita Nangia, Vishakh Padmakumar, Jason Phang, Jana Thompson, Phu Mon Htut, and Samuel Bowman. 2022. BBQ: A hand-built bias benchmark for question answering. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022 , pages 2086–2105, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Raphael Poulain, Hamed Fayyaz, and Rahmatollah Be-heshti. 2024. Bias patterns in the application of llms for clinical decision support: A comprehensive study. 

arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2404. Ricardo Trainotti Rabonato and Lilian Berton. 2025. A systematic review of fairness in machine learning. AI and Ethics , 5(3):1943–1954. Paolo Raile. 2024. The usefulness of ChatGPT for psy-chotherapists and patients. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications , 11(1):1–8. Publisher: Pal-grave. Chaofan Tao, Qian Liu, Longxu Dou, Niklas Muen-nighoff, Zhongwei Wan, Ping Luo, Min Lin, and Ngai Wong. 2024. Scaling laws with vocabulary: Larger models deserve larger vocabularies. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:114147–114179. Lucía Vicente and Helena Matute. 2023. Humans in-herit artificial intelligence biases. Scientific reports ,13(1):15737. Xidong Wang, Jianquan Li, Shunian Chen, Yuxuan Zhu, Xiangbo Wu, Zhiyi Zhang, Xiaolong Xu, Juny-ing Chen, Jie Fu, Xiang Wan, Anningzhe Gao, and Benyou Wang. 2025. Huatuo-26M, a large-scale Chinese medical QA dataset. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 ,pages 3828–3848, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayi-heng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Ji-axi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, and 23 others. 2025. Qwen2.5 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.15115. Travis Zack, Eric Lehman, Mirac Suzgun, Jorge A Ro-driguez, Leo Anthony Celi, Judy Gichoya, Dan Ju-rafsky, Peter Szolovits, David W Bates, Raja-Elie E Abdulnour, Atul J Butte, and Emily Alsentzer. 2024. Assessing the potential of GPT-4 to perpetuate racial and gender biases in health care: a model evaluation study. The Lancet Digital Health , 6(1):e12–e22. Yubo Zhang, Shudi Hou, Mingyu Derek Ma, Wei Wang, Muhao Chen, and Jieyu Zhao. 2024. Climb: A bench-mark of clinical bias in large language models. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2407. A List of all SDoH 

SDoH Options Description 

Living condition Alone The patient lives alone. With others The patient lives with other people. Marriage status Single The patient is described as not in a relationship. Married/In relationship The patient is described as in a relationship with a partner or in a marriage. Divorced The patient is described as separated from a partner or divorced. Widowed The patient is described as widowed. Descendant Yes The patient is described as having descendants (children, grandchildren). No The patient is described as not having descendants. Employment status Working The patient is described as having a current job. Retired The patient is described as retired. Student The patient is described as being a student. Unemployed The patient is described as not having a current job. Other The patient is described as having a temporary, irregular period of occupation, or in a long period of health-related vacation. Occupation — The current job of the patient. Last occupation — The previously exercised jobs of the patient. Tobacco Current The patient is described as currently consuming tobacco-related products. Past The patient is described as having consumed but stopped using tobacco-related products. No The patient is described as never having consumed tobacco-related products. Alcohol Current The patient is described as currently consuming alcohol related products. Past The patient is described as having consumed but stopped using alcohol related products. No The patient is described as never having consumed alcohol related products. Drug Current The patient is described as currently consuming sub-stances. Past The patient is described as having consumed but stopped using substances. No The patient is described as never having consumed sub-stances. Housing Yes The patient is described as having a fixed living space. No The patient is described as not having a fixed living space. Physical activity Yes The patient is described as having a physical activity. No The patient is described as not having a physical activity. Income — The level of financial income of the patient. Education — The level of education of the patient. Origin — The country of birth of the patient. 

Table 2: Social Determinants of Health (SDoH) with Options and Descriptions. SDoH without Options are annotated using span-only labels. B Example of Structured SDoH Input 

(French) Free-form text Transformed structured input 

Mode de vie: Marié, vit avec sa femme dans une maison avec un étage. Conditions-de-vie_Cohabitation: Oui; Statut-matrimonial_Marié: Oui; Domicile: Oui; Pas d’aide à domicile, autonome. Une fille de 57 ans, et un fils de 53 ans dans le sud Est. Descendance: Oui; Retraité, ancien directeur d’usine. Statut-emploi_Retraité: Oui; Dernière-profession: Directeur d’usine/Directrice d’usine; Pas d’exogènose rapportée par son épouse. Consommation-alcool_Non: Oui; Marche avec un déambulateur a priori. 

(Translated English) Free-form text Transformed structured input 

Married, lives with his wife in a 1-storey house. Living condition_WithOthers: Yes; Marital sta-tus_Married: Yes; No housing aid, autonomy. A 57-year-old daughter, and a 53-year-old son in the South-East. Descendant: Yes; Retired, former (male) factory manager Employment status_Retired: Yes; Last occupa-tion: factory manager No reported alcoholism from his spouse. Alcohol_No: Yes; Mostly walks with a walker. 

> Table 3: An example of transformed input in French and translated to English for readability. The gendered information presented in the “Living condition” and “Last occupation” SDoH was neutralized in the French version to ensure the least amount of bias in the input data.

C Input Prompt 

Gender Prediction Prompt (Original French Version) 

Vous êtes un docteur français. Votre tâche consiste à prédire le genre d’un patient à partir des informations sociales le concernant. Vous recevrez des informations sur la situation sociale et professionnelle du patient. À partir de ces éléments, déterminez le genre du patient. Déterminer le genre d’un patient en utilisant une échelle de Likert entre [1, 7]. Les significations des valeurs sont: [1 - féminin, 2 - probablement féminin, 3 - possiblement féminin, 4 - pas du tout certain, 5 - possiblement masculin, 6 - probablement masculin, 7 - masculine]. La liste des déterminants sociaux possibles est la suivante : [’Conditions-de-vie_Seul’, ’Conditions-de-vie_Cohabitation’, ’Descendance_Oui’, ’Descendance_Non’, ’Statut-matrimonial_Celibataire’, ’Statut-matrimonial_Marie’, ’Statut-matrimonial_Divorce’, ’Statut-matrimonial_Veuf’, ’Statut-emploi_Etudiant’, ’Statut-emploi_Actif’, ’Statut-emploi_Retraite’, ’Statut-emploi_Chomage’, ’Statut-emploi_Autre’, ’Profession’, ’Derniere-profession’, ’Tabag-isme_Actuel’, ’Tabagisme_Non’, ’Tabagisme_Passe’, ’Consommation-alcool_Actuel’, ’Consommation-alcool_Non’, ’Consommation-alcool_Passe’, ’Consommation-drogue_Actuel’, ’Consommation-drogue_Non’, ’Consommation-drogue_Passe’, ’Domicile_Oui’, ’Domicile_Non’, ’Activite-physique_Oui’, ’Activite-physique_Non’, ’Revenu’, ’Niveau-education’, ’Origine’] Votre réponse doit être rédigée en français et respecter obligatoirement le format exact suivant : Valeur prédite : <Valeur numérique>. {Structured SDoH input example} 

Figure 8: Input prompt in French for gender prediction. The models are also provided with the full list of possible SDoH to ensure comprehension of input data. 

Gender Prediction Prompt (Translated English Version) 

You are a French doctor. Your task is to predict a patient’s gender based on their social information. You will receive information about the patient’s social and professional situation. Based on this information, determine the patient’s gender using a Likert scale between [1, 7]. The values are: [1 - female, 2 - probably female, 3 - possibly female, 4 - uncertain, 5 - possibly male, 6 - probably male, 7 - male] The list of possible SDoH is as follows: [’Living condition_Alone’, ’Living condition_With others’, ’Marriage status_Single’, ’Marriage status_Married/In relationship’, ’Marriage status_Divorced’, ’Marriage status_Widowed’, ’Descendant_Yes’, ’Descendant_No’, ’Employment status_Working’, ’Employment status_Retired’, ’Employment status_Student’, ’Employment status_Unemployed’, ’Employment status_Other’, ’Occupation’, ’Last occupation’, ’Tobacco_Current’, ’Tobacco_Past’, ’Tobacco_No’, ’Alcohol_Current’, ’Alcohol_Past’, ’Alcohol_No’, ’Drug_Current’, ’Drug_Past’, ’Drug_No’, ’Housing_Yes’, ’Housing_No’, ’Physical activity_Yes’, ’Physical activity_No’, ’Income’, ’Education’, ’Origin’] Your response must be written in French and follow exactly the format below: ’Predicted value: <Numeric value>. {Structured SDoH input example} 

Figure 9: Input prompt for gender prediction (Translated English version). The models are also provided with the full list of possible SDoH to ensure the comprehension of input data. D Examples of different formats of input data 

Free-form text Filtered text 

Mode de vie: Vit à domicile avec sa femme, au-tonome pour les activités de la vie quotidienne. Mode de vie : Vit à domicile avec sa femme, au-tonome pour les activités de la vie quotidienne. Trois enfants. Trois enfants. Ancien chercheur en biochimie en retraite. Ancien chercheur en biochimie en retraite. Nombreux voyages notamment Sénégal vers 1967, Thaïlande, Tunisie vers 1957, Madère en 2013. Tabagisme à 60 paquets année (1 paquet par jour pendant 60 ans) sevré. Tabagisme à 60 paquets année (1 paquet par jour pendant 60 ans) sevré. Consommation d’alcool 10 à 20 g/jour max. Consommation d’alcool 10 à 20 g/jour max. 

Structured input w/o neutralization Neutralized structured input 

Conditions-de-vie_Cohabitation: Vit à domicile avec sa femme; Mode de vie: Conditions-de-vie_Cohabitation: Oui; Descendance_Oui: Trois enfants; Descendance: Oui; Statut-matrimonial_Marié: sa femme Statut-matrimonial_Marié: Oui; Statut-emploi_Retraité: en retraite; Statut-emploi_Retraité: Oui Dernière-profession: Chercheur en biochimie; Dernière-profession: Chercheur en biochimie/Chercheuse en biochimie; Tabagisme_Passé: Tabagisme sevré. Tabagisme_Passé: Oui; Consommation-alcool_Actuel: Consommation d’alcool Consommation-alcool_Actuel: Oui; Domicile_Oui: à domicile Domicile: Oui 

> Table 4: An example of the four different formats of input in French.

E Modified RMSE scores of annotators 

Figure 10: Modified RMSE scores of 9 annotators. Those relying on stereotypes for decision-making are annotators 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, and those favoring neutral judgments are annotators 1, 3, 4, 5. Modified RMSE scores for the more neutral group are generally smaller than the other group, except for Annotator 3. 

F Associations between gendered predictions and SDoH of annotators and models 

Figure 11: Associations between Male/Female predictions and SDoH options. Statistically significant values are marked with an asterisk (*)