Title: 2603.02704v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.02704v1

Published Time: Wed, 04 Mar 2026 01:39:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
1

# Intelligent Pathological Diagnosis of Gestational Trophoblastic 

# Diseases via Visual-Language Deep Learning Model 

# Author Information 

Yuhang Liu 1,a , Yueyang Cang 1,a ,Wenge Que 1,f, Xinru Bai 1,b , Xingtong Wang a, Kuisheng Chen c,

Jingya Li d, Xiaoteng Zhang a, Xinmin Li e, Lixia Zhang f, Pingge Hu g, Qiaoting Xie h, Peiyu Xu i,

Xianxu Zeng b,* , Li Shi a,* 

> a

Department of Automation , Tsinghua University , Beijing, China 

> b

Department of Pathology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University , Zhengzhou, China 

> c

Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University , Zhengzhou, China 

> d

Luoyang Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital , Luoyang, China 

> e

Department of Pathology, Women and Infants Hospital of Zhengzhou , Zhengzhou, China 

> f

Xinmi Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital , Xinmi, China 

> g

China Academy of Information and Communications Technology , Beijing, China 

> h

Anyang Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital , Anyang, China 

> i

Suixian Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital , Shangqiu, China 

> f

College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai, China 

* Corresponding author s. 

> 1

These authors contributed equally to this work. 2

# Abstract 

The pathological diagnosis of gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD) takes a long time, relies heavily on 

the experience of pathologists, and the consistency of initial diagnosis is low, which seriously threatens 

maternal health and reproductive outcomes. We developed an expert model for GTD pathological 

diagnosis, named GTDoctor. GTDoctor can perform pixel-based lesion segmentation on pathological 

slides, and output diagnostic conclusions and personalized pathological analysis result s. We developed a

software system, GTD iagnosis, based on this technology and conducted clinical trials . The retrospective 

results demonstrated that GTD iagnosis achieved a mean precision of over 0.91 for lesion detection in 

pathological slides (n=679 slides). In prospective studies, pathologists using GTDiagnosis attained a

Positive Predictive Value of 95.59% (n=68 patients). The tool reduced average diagnostic time from 56 to 

16 seconds per case (n=285 patients). GTDoctor and GTDiagnosis offer a novel solution for GTD 

pathological diagnosis, enhancing diagnostic performance and efficiency while maintaining clinical 

interpretability. 

# Introduction 

Gestational trophoblastic diseases (GTDs) are a group of disorders originating from placental 

trophoblastic cells. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) 2020 (5th edition) classification 

of female ge nital system tumors[1], GTDs can be histologically divided into: (1) hydatidiform moles 

(HM), (2) Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN), including choriocarcinoma, etc, (3) tumor-like 

lesions, (4) abnormal (non-molar) villous lesions. GTDs pose a significant potential threat to maternal 

health. If common HMs are not properly identified and managed, they may progress into life-threatening 

choriocarcinoma. Therefore, early diagnosis of GTDs is of critical clinical significance[2,3]. 3

Pathological examination is the gold standard for GTD diagnosis. Currently, there are three main 

clinical pathological diagnostic methods: serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) testing, short 

tandem repeat (STR) testing, and artificial diagnosis through microscopic examination of tissue 

sections[4-7]. Among these, microscopic histopathological examination is cost-effective and widely used. 

However, there are several challenges in pathological diagnosis. HCG testing typically requires multiple 

dynamic monitoring sessions over an extended period, leading to delays for patients who need rapid 

diagnosis and timely intervention. STR testing, on the other hand, has a high technical threshold, and non-

specialized hospitals may lack the necessary facilities[6,25-27]. Moreover, manual diagnosis is inherently 

subjective and heavily reliant on the expertise of experienced pathologists, who are currently in short 

supply due to a significant shortage of qualified professionals. In China, there are fewer than 20,000 

registered pathologists[8], with 70% concentrated in top-tier hospitals. For many obstetrics and 

gynecology hospitals, there is no dedicated pathology department, making pathological examination 

inconvenient, as tissue samples need to be sent to other larger hospitals for testing. This underscores the 

urgent need for reliable intelligent diagnostic support tools to improve the efficiency and accuracy of 

pathological diagnoses in this field[28-30]. 

Deep learning and large-model technologies have introduced promising solutions for pathological 

diagnosis [19-24]. Generic vision-language models for pathology are able to analyze the characteristics of 

various types of slides[9-11,37], while multimodal large language models have the capabilities of 

providing analytical insights from image and text data[12-14], and heuristic neural networks effectively 

extract features of hydatidiform moles[15,16]. These advances are encouraging but still facing notable 

limitations. Currently, most models tend to focus more on the comprehensive analysis of pathology slides 

for general diseases, while diseases related to gynecology, such as GTD, are often overlooked. There are 

no large models currently using GTD-related data for learning and training. Furthermore, artificial 

intelligence and large model technologies are still far from being fully applied in practice, with very few 

models addressing real clinical situations or considering the clinical needs under different medical 

conditions. To address these challenges, we have collected the first GTD database and developed a multi-4

scenario GTD diagnostic expert model, GTDoctor, which has undergone complete clinical application. 

Our research successfully bridges the gap for large-model deployment and clinical application. 

In this study, we first established a multi-center pathological slide database for GTDs. Based on 

patients' pathological images, diagnostic guidelines, and expert pathologists' knowledge, we developed 

developed an expert model for GTD pathological diagnosis, GTDoctor, and its corresponding intelligent 

diagnostic support software system, GTDiagnosis, which is applicable to multiple scenarios. This model 

can self-learn and adapt to different slide styles based on regional data variations, making it suitable for 

use with both microscopes and slide scanners in hospitals of varying medical levels. We conducted 

retrospective and prospective trials across seven centers, including the Third Affiliated Hospital of 

Zhengzhou University, to assess improvements in diagnostic accuracy and efficiency. The results were 

remarkable, demonstrating that our system can greatly assist pathologists in clinical diagnosis and 

research within the GTD field. Fig. 1 presents the system architecture diagram of our project. 

# Results 

# Data and patient overview 

This study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the Third Affiliated Hospital of 

Zhengzhou University, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, the Luo Yang Maternal and 

Child Health Care Hospital, the Xinmi Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital, the Anyang Maternal 

and Child Health Care Hospital, the Sui County Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital, and the 

Women and Infants Hospital of Zhengzhou. In this study, we used a total of 1,916 Whole Slide Images 

(WSI) from 831 patients across the seven centers, along with corresponding baseline information and 

clinical cases for each patient. All patient samples were collected between 2015 and 2024. 

The data from these seven centers were organized into four major cohorts and nine sub-cohorts. 

Cohort A, from the Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, was divided into Cohort A-1 (406 

patients, 1038 slides) and Cohort A-2 (112 patients, 253 slides). Cohort A-1 was used for model training 5

and testing, while Cohort A-2 was used for internal retrospective validation. Cohort B consisted of data 

from five medical centers and was used for external retrospective validation to evaluate the generalization 

performance of GTDiagnosis. These included Anyang Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital (Cohort 

B-1, 22 patients, 118 slides), Xinmi Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital (Cohort B-2, 21 patients, 96 

slides), the Women and Infants Hospital of Zhengzhou (Cohort B-3, 80 patients, 80 slides), the First 

Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University (Cohort B-4, 63 patients, 111 slides), and Sui County 

Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital (Cohort B-5, 19 patients, 21 slides). Cohort C, from Luoyang 

Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital, was used to quantify the impact of GTDiagnosis on traditional 

diagnostic practices (Cohort C-1, 40 patients, 72 slides). Additionally, a prospective testing cohort from a

multi-center mixed data source was utilized (Cohort D-1, 68 patients, 127 slides). There was no overlap 

of patients between any training and testing sets for different tasks. Table 1 shows the baseline 

characteristics of the data. 

# Data Cleaning and Dataset Construction 

Data Selection: We collaborated with pathologists to first filter the WSI data, removing slides with issues 

such as scanning blur, air bubbles, tissue folding, and abnormal staining to ensure that the data used for 

training were of high quality. We obtained digital pathology slide images captured under a 40x objective 

lens, with a resolution typically around 60,000 × 60,000 pixels. 

Data Annotation: We performed annotation on the filtered pathology slides. Pathologists used a

Windows-based annotation system to label edema lesions, hyperplasia lesions, and villi regions at the 

pixel level, using different colors for each category. The pathology slides to be annotated were randomly 

assigned to a pathologist for labeling. Once the annotation was completed, the labeled slide was 

transferred to another pathologist for verification. In cases where consensus could not be reached, a third 

senior pathologist with over 15 years of experience would make the final judgment. In summary, the 

annotation process consisted of initial labeling, verification, and potential review stages.After 

accumulating a certain number of annotated slides (237 WSI), we improved the annotation workflow to 6

enhance efficiency. We used these annotated data to train a U-Net-based semantic segmentation network 

for basic lesion segmentation[17,18]. This model was then used to segment unlabeled slides, which 

helped reduce the need for initial manual annotation. The majority of lesions could be correctly annotated 

by the model, greatly alleviating the workload and time required from pathologists. The U-Net model's 

annotated results were randomly assigned to a pathologist for revision, then passed to another pathologist 

for validation. In cases of disagreement, a third senior pathologist with over 15 years of experience would 

make the final judgment. The process thus consisted of initial model annotation, revision and validation, 

and potential review. 

Dataset Construction: In constructing the pathology slide dataset, we divided each WSI into a series of 

512 × 512 patches at a 4× magnification level. The patches were adjacent to each other, covering the 

entire WSI. We then used an adaptive variance threshold algorithm to filter out patches dominated by 

slide background, retaining only images with valid tissue. In total, we extracted 276,562 patches from the 

1,916 WSI. 

# Multicenter Validation of GTDiagnosis 

We evaluated the performance of GTDiagnosis across six medical centers (Cohorts A-2, Cohorts B-1 to 

B-5). For these patients, pathological slides were digitized using whole-slide scanners and served as the 

input for the model. We assessed GTDiagnosis on two tasks: lesion segmentation and disease diagnosis. 

The ROC curves for edema and hyperplasia lesions are shown in Fig. 3. For edema lesion segmentation, 

the AUC ranged from 0.968 to 0.998 across different medical centers, while for hyperplasia lesions, the 

AUC ranged from 0.906 to 0.969. These results demonstrate that our model achieved consistent and high 

segmentation performance across data from multiple hospitals. 

Detailed performance metrics for each cohort are presented in Fig. 3. We evaluated mIoU, mDice, 

mRecall, and mPrecision. For the cohort from the Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University 

(Cohort A-2), the model achieved mPrecision = 0.969 (95% CI: 0.961 –0.977), mRecall = 0.947 (95% CI: 7

0.940 – 0.954), mDice = 0.966 (95% CI: 0.958 –0.974), and mIoU = 0.955 (95% CI: 0.946 – 0.964). 

Across all centers, mPrecision, mRecall, and mDice were consistently above 0.9, while mIoU was above 

0.84. These results highlight the strong accuracy and excellent generalizability of our vision model. 

During training, we prioritized maintaining a high Recall, as this reflects the model's ability to detect 

potential lesions —a critical capability for assisting clinicians in diagnosis and decision-making. 

The diagnostic results for each cohort are summarized in confusion matrices, as shown in Fig. 3. 

For Cohort A-2, the accuracy was 0.91; at other medical centers, our model also achieved significant 

results, with Cohort B-1 at 0.95, Cohort B-2 at 0.86, Cohort B-3 at 0.86, Cohort B-4 at 0.84, and Cohort 

B-5 at 0.74. Overall, the mean recall for hydatidiform mole was 0.90, while the mean recall for 

choriocarcinoma was 0.86. These findings indicate that our model is highly sensitive in identifying both 

diseases. Additionally, it is worth noting that these results were obtained using GTDiagnosis alone. In 

actual clinical use, GTDiagnosis serves as an auxiliary tool for doctors, with the final decision on 

contentious pa thology resting with the clinicians. Therefore, the accuracy in real-world applications is 

expected to be higher than these values .

To evaluate the lesion segmentation performance of our model in microscopic fields, we selected 

20 pathological slides from hydatidiform mole patients in the cohort from the Third Affiliated Hospital of 

Zhengzhou University (Cohort A-2). The slides were examined under a 4× magnification microscope, 

with the slides manually moved by a pathologist. During this process, GTDiagnosis performed real-time 

lesion recognition and segmentation on the microscopic field images and saved the results for subsequent 

stitching. Once the entire slide was scanned under the microscope, a stitched image containing the 

model's segmentation results for edema and hyperplasia lesions was generated. These stitched images 

were then registered and compared with the ground truth annotations provided by the pathologists to 

validate the model's performance in microscopic fields. 

The lesion segmentation performance of GTDiagnosis in microscopic fields achieved mPrecision 

= 0.825, mRecall = 0.842, mDice = 0.838, and mIoU = 0.775. While the performance was slightly lower 8

than that on digitized pathology slides, likely due to factors such as lighting variations and slide quality, 

the model still demonstrated the ability to detect most lesions effectively. This indicates that GTDiagnosis 

can serve as a valuable auxiliary tool in assisting pathologists during microscopic diagnosis, particularly 

for less experienced pathologists. 

# Improve ment in Clinical Efficiency and Diagnostic Accuracy 

To assess the practical impact of our model on pathologists' daily diagnoses, we conducted a validation 

experiment using data from the Luoyang Maternal and Child Health Hospital (Cohort C-1). Two 

pathologists were recruited for the test, categorized as junior pathologists (0-3 years of experience) and 

senior pathologists (3-6 years of experience). For each pathologist, 20 cases and their sections were 

randomly selected for analysis and diagnosis. The results demonstrated significant advantages in both 

diagnostic time and accuracy when using GTDiagnosis compared to the traditional microscope-based 

diagnostic process. 

For junior pathologists, the average diagnosis time per patient decreased from 57.35 seconds to 

14.58 seconds, and the average diagnostic accuracy improved from 82.88% to 91.10%. For senior 

pathologists, the average diagnosis time per patient decreased from 54.66 seconds to 17.83 seconds, with 

diagnostic accuracy increasing from 95.21% to 98.63%. In the test, the average diagnosis time refers to 

the time taken by the doctor from receiving a patient's pathological slide to completing the diagnosis, 

while the average diagnostic accuracy is the proportion of correct diagnostic conclusions made by the 

doctor after analyzing the pathological slide. The experimental group was analyzed by the microscope 

equipped with GTDiagnosis, while the control group was analyzed by the traditional microscope. 

These results indicate that GTDiagnosis can reduce the average diagnostic time to about a quarter 

of the original time, while simultaneously improving diagnostic accuracy. This has the potential to 

significantly alleviate pathologists from repetitive tasks, particularly for junior pathologists, as the 

segmentation results from the visual model provide strong diagnostic support. In addition, by using the 

combination of pathological section scanner and GTDiagnosis system, doctors can directly analyze the 9

visual field of the whole section, which will further improve efficiency. This proves the remarkable time 

efficiency advantage of our method. 

# Prospective Clinical Testing of GTDiagnosis 

In the prospective testing phase, GTDiagnosis was utilized to assist pathologists in completing diagnostic 

tasks, and its performance was meticulously documented. This study was conducted from May 2024 to 

October 2024 at multiple centers. A total of 68 patients and 127 pathological sections were included. Of 

these, 21 patients and 45 slides were from the Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University; 19

patients and 34 slides were from Luoyang Maternal and Child Health Hospital; 9 patients and 12 slides 

were from Xinmi Maternal and Child Health Hospital; 11 patients and 23 slides were from the Women 

and Infants Hospital of Zhengzhou ; and 8 patients and 13 slides were from Anyang Maternal and Child 

Health Hospital. 

In the process, tissue sections were first batch-scanned into digital slides using a pathological 

section scanner, and then pathologists conducted online diagnoses on computer devices equipped with 

GTDiagnosis. Finally, GTDiagnosis integrated and archived the diagnostic results, achieving a full-

process intelligent auxiliary diagnosis of GTD. For cases diagnosed as abnormal, further pathological 

tests were conducted, including hCG testing and STR testing. We considered these test results as ground 

truth. Based on the further testing results, we calculated the Positive Predictive Value, which refers to the 

initial diagnosis accuracy. The results indicated that the Positive Predictive Value of pathologists using 

GTDiagnosis reached 95.59% (65 out of 68), demonstrating that pathologists could achieve highly 

accurate diagnoses based solely on image data extracted from pathological sections using GTDiagnosis. 

# Discussion 

In this study, we present a multimodal AI-based diagnostic support system for Gestational Trophoblastic 

Diseases (GTDs), called GTDiagnosis. This system automates the analysis of patient endometrial 

pathological slides and generates diagnostic results and reports. GTDiagnosis leverages a multicenter 10 

dataset consisting of 1,916 whole-slide pathological images (276,562 patches), integrated with state-of-

the-art visual and language models. Compared to traditional manual diagnostic methods, GTDiagnosis 

shows significant improvements in both diagnostic accuracy and efficiency for GTDs. 

In the field of artificial intelligence-assisted GT diagnosis, such as the work by Patison Palee, 

used 939 hydatidiform mole pathology slides to extract 15 numerical features for the identification of 

proliferative tissue, and the model was limited to classifying the types of hydatidiform moles without 

clinical testing[15]. Moreover, there is no large-scale, multicenter study focusing on lesion detection and 

intelligent diagnostic support for GTDs. Our work provides a more comprehensive and detailed solution 

for the computer aided diagnosis (CAD) of GTDs. The novelties of our proposed GTDiagnosis can be 

summarized as follows: (1) Comprehensive Diagnostic Capability: GTDiagnosis combines lesion 

segmentation, classification, and pathology analysis to provide end-to-end diagnostic support for multiple 

GTD types. In external validation datasets from six independent medical centers, the model demonstrated 

excellent performance in lesion segmentation, with mPrecision, mRecall, and mDice exceeding 0.90, 

showcasing its remarkable generalization ability. In the disease classification task, the average recall for 

hydatidiform mole was 0.90, and for choriocarcinoma, it was 0.86, indicating high sensitivity to key GTD 

types. In addition, the system has the ability to perform real-time analysis of the microscopic field of view, 

enabling its application in resource-limited settings without digital pathology scanning equipment. (2) 

Integration of Multimodal Features: GTDiagnosis effectively integrates text and image information to 

perform lesion segmentation and disease classification. The multi-scale adaptive attention vision model 

developed in this study significantly enhances segmentation accuracy and improves recognition of multi-

scale lesions in GTDs. Additionally, the decision model incorporates pathologists' expertise and clinical 

guidelines, enabling the system to provide authoritative and professional classification results. Compared 

to single-modality image segmentation, we have introduced rich textual knowledge to analyze patients' 

pathological slide images. Compared to black-box pure neural network methods, our approach enhances 

the clinical interpretability of AI-based diagnosis. (3) Diagnostic Support and Efficiency Improvement: 

GTDiagnosis introduces advanced language modeling techniques to generate in-depth diagnostic reports. 11 

By using retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), the system can retrieve relevant medical literature and 

generate personalized, evidence-based diagnostic insights. (4) User-Friendliness and Self-Evolution 

Potential: Pathologists can master the system within 20 minutes, with significant improvements in 

workflow efficiency. The results show that GTDiagnosis effectively reduces pathologists' diagnostic 

workload and enhances diagnostic confidence. Additionally, the system ’ s online learning capability 

allows newly collected data to be used for model retraining, which is beneficial for its deployment across 

multiple centers and indicates its strong evolution potential. 

It is noteworthy that AI-assisted diagnosis faces many challenges in clinical practice. When using 

visual models to analyze pathology slide images, challenges arise due to variations in staining methods, 

slide scanning instruments, and regional differences between hospitals. These factors can complicate the 

analysis performed by the visual models. To address the issue of inconsistent slide styles and scales, we 

have made several efforts. During the model training phase, we applied data augmentation techniques 

such as color enhancement and size scaling. Additionally, we targeted improvements to traditional 

attention mechanisms, allowing the modified algorithm to perform adaptive attention matching across 

multiple scales —from micro to macro —enabling it to better accommodate a wider variety of slide styles. 

Finally, we incorporated an online learning algorithm, enabling the model to evolve autonomously. After 

deploying our base model in different regions, local slide data can be used to fine-tune the model, further 

improving its adaptability. These efforts have yielded positive results in multi-center retrospective studies, 

and prospective experiments have also demonstrated the model ’s reliability in clinical applications. 

Moreover, we have thoroughly considered the practical demands of medical applications. In low-

tolerance medical scenarios, we combine structured decision models with unstructured large language 

models for pathology analysis. This hybrid approach mitigates the hallucination effects of large models 

by incorporating a knowledge framework that constrains them. The structured decision model integrates 

the diagnostic logic and experience of medical professionals, while the large language model draws on an 12 

extensive knowledge base to provide expert generative analysis. Together, they form a robust system that 

ensures both reliability and precision in complex medical environments. 

Although GTDiagnosis shows promising results, there are some limitations. First, while the 

system performs excellently on digital pathology slides, its performance in microscopic fields is slightly 

affected by factors such as lighting and slide quality. Second, the online learning capability of the system 

requires strict monitoring to prevent overfitting and ensure model stability during continuous updates. In 

the future, we hope to use more advanced multimodal large models to further improve GTDiagnosis's 

predictive performance, especially in identifying complex samples. Additionally, we can leverage the 

scalability of our workflow to include more related diseases, thereby enhancing the model's applicability. 

In conclusion, our research has reduced the lengthy manual diagnostic process to mere seconds, while 

also effectively assisting doctors in analysis and decision-making, particularly providing a powerful tool 

for junior pathologists with limited experience. In regions with limited medical resources, our system can 

be accessed via a microscope for auxiliary analysis, while hospitals equipped with the appropriate 

conditions can utilize pathology slide scanners for batch analysis, thereby digitizing and automating the 

manual examination process. As an intelligent diagnostic support system, GTDiagnosis can offer valuable 

assistance to pathologists and researchers in clinical practice, medical education, and research, providing 

robust support for intelligent and personalized diagnoses .

# Methods 

# Lesion Segmentation Visual Model 

The lesion segmentation process consists of two main parts: first, the segmentation of the villous areas, 

and second, the segmentation of the lesion areas. The model is built based on a two-stage training process. 

In the first stage, the network first segments the villous areas, outputting a probability map for each pixel 

indicating its likelihood of belonging to the corresponding villous region. Since lesions are typically 

located within the villous areas, these probability maps provide crucial information for lesion 

segmentation. To effectively utilize this information, the input for lesion segmentation includes not only 13 

the original pathological RGB images but also the villous segmentation probability maps. Before being 

fed into the lesion segmentation model, the pathological RGB images are normalized by dividing the 

pixel values by 255, bringing them into the range of 0 to 1, which is consistent with the villous probability 

values. Then, this normalized RGB image and the villous probability map (as a fourth channel) are 

combined into a four-channel input image, which is then passed into the lesion segmentation model. This 

model is used to segment edema and proliferative lesions, and the corresponding process is shown in Fig. 

2b. 

In terms of network architecture, each segmentation model consists of three main components: 

the encoder model, the decoder model, and the segmentation head, as shown in Fig. 1b. The encoder 

model is responsible for extracting features from the input image and generating multi-dimensional 

feature maps. The decoder model then merges multi-scale features to form decoded feature maps. These 

decoded feature maps are passed to the downstream segmentation head for precise lesion area 

segmentation [31]. In this project, the villous segmentation network uses a separate encoder model, 

decoder, and segmentation head, while the edema and proliferative lesion segmentation tasks share the 

same encoder and decoder models, but have their own independent segmentation heads. 

We have innovatively developed a method based on a multi-scale attention mechanism to 

effectively extract multi-scale features from pathology images. This helps us address two key issues: first, 

the significant size differences of lesions in the images; and second, the variations in the field of view and 

magnification of pathology slides and microscopes. These two issues make it difficult for traditional 

single-scale methods to handle all lesions and information effectively. To tackle these challenges, the 

pathology image is divided into patches of different scales, with the central region's patch set as the 

baseline, and patches of other scales are used to introduce multi-scale information. An attention 

mechanism is applied to each scale of patches to generate feature encodings, and during the feature fusion 

process, the query vector comes from a predefined intermediate-scale patch, while the key and value 

vectors come from patches of different scales. This design allows the model to integrate multi-scale 

features, capturing both macro and micro information from the pathology images, thereby better adapting 14 

to the features of lesions of varying sizes and effectively addressing the information differences caused by 

variations in field of view and magnification. Finally, we chose MaskFormerV2 as the segmentation head 

[32,33], which is highly consistent with the encoder-decoder architecture and performs excellently in 

lesion segmentation tasks, making it an ideal choice. 

During training, the model adopts a two-stage training strategy. In the first stage, we freeze the 

parameters of the pre-trained feature extraction encoder and focus on training the downstream decoder 

model and segmentation head. To train this model, we used 40% of the dataset, which consists of 415 full 

pathological slides. In this stage, we tested different training strategies and compared them with other 

mainstream segmentation models, including U-Net++, FPN, and DeepLabV3+[18,34-36]. All models 

were trained on the same dataset, and we compared their average processing time and lesion segmentation 

accuracy on a single image. The results showed that the ViT-based segmentation head, MaskFormerV2, 

performed similarly in terms of processing time to the other models, with an average processing time of 

85.6ms, compared to 95.7ms for U-Net++, 90.7ms for FPN, and 82.3ms for DeepLabV3+. In terms of 

accuracy, the ViT-based model achieved a pixel-level mIoU of 81.5%, whereas U-Net++ had an mIoU of 

75.6%, FPN 74.5%, and DeepLabV3+ 75.9% (Supplementary Fig. 6, Supplementary Table 1). These 

results suggest that our ViT-based segmentation head demonstrates higher accuracy in lesion 

segmentation tasks, and since the feature extraction encoder also uses ViT, the overall network has an 

advantage in global training and fine-tuning processes. 

We also tested the impact of different patch overlap rates on the model's performance, including 

0%, 25%, 50%, and 75%. The experimental results showed that a 75% overlap rate achieved the best 

performance on the validation set, with mIoU improving from 81.5% at 0% overlap to 85.6% at 75% 

overlap (Supplementary Table 2). However, considering that excessive overlap may lead to overfitting, 

we ultimately chose a 50% overlap rate for training, as it provided a good balance between performance 

improvement and overfitting prevention. Additionally, due to the multi-scale nature of lesions in 

gestational trophoblastic diseases, we also tested the effect of single-scale training and multi-scale 

training with factors of 1.0, 1.2, and 0.8. The results showed that the multi-scale model achieved a pixel-15 

level mIoU of 86.3%, outperforming the single-scale training model, which achieved 81.5%. This further 

validates that training with multi-scale pyramid images can improve the model's accuracy across different 

magnifications. 

In the second stage of training, we unfroze the feature extraction encoder and used 60% of the 

training dataset, which consisted of 623 pathological slides, for global training, allowing the network to 

adjust all parameters. This stage significantly improved segmentation accuracy, especially in detecting 

small lesions, which resulted in better performance. 

Initially, we used the pixel-level BCEWithLogitsLoss as our loss function. However, we still 

observed some issues. First, because the blank area contains more samples, while the edema, proliferative, 

and villous areas have relatively fewer samples, the model's performance on these areas was poor, 

especially in the proliferative regions, which occupy the smallest area. This is a class imbalance problem. 

To address this, we employed a weighted loss method, providing higher weights to the proliferative lesion 

areas: 

𝐀 𝐀𧐀𝐀𥠀𝐀 =− 1  

> 𝐀 𧐀 =1
> 𝐀

[w1 ⋅ yi ⋅ log( σ(xi)) + w0 ⋅ (1 − yi) ⋅ log(1 − σ(xi))]   (1) 

Additionally, the BCEWithLogitsLoss primarily optimizes pixel-level accuracy but does not 

adequately consider lesion-level accuracy, particularly for detecting small lesions. The identification of 

small lesions is crucial for pathologists, yet they are often overlooked. Therefore, improving lesion-level 

accuracy is especially important for AI-assisted diagnostic systems. 

To solve these two issues, we designed a hybrid loss function combining the pixel-level 

BCEWithLogitsLoss and lesion-level Dice coefficient loss. Specifically, the total loss function is defined 

as: 

𝐀 𝐀𨐀𝐀𧀀𝐀 = 𝐀 1 ⋅ 𝐀 𝐀𧐀𝐀𥠀𝐀 + 𝐀 2 ⋅ 𝐀 𝐀𥠀𝐀𧐀𨐀𨀀 (2)

Where 𝐀 𝐀𧐀𝐀𧀀𝐀 represents the BCEWithLogitsLoss, which computes the difference between the 

predicted and true values for each pixel, and 𝐀 𝐀𥠀𝐀𧐀𨐀𨀀 is the lesion-level loss, using the Dice coefficient to 16 

measure the overlap between the predicted lesion region and the true lesion region[38,39]. The Dice 

coefficient loss is computed as: 

𝐀 𝐀𥠀𝐀𧐀𨐀𨀀 = 1 − 𝐀   + 𝐀   

> 2⋅𝐀  ∩𝐀 (3)

where 𝐀 and 𝐀   are the predicted and true lesion areas, and ⋅ denotes the area (number of pixels) 

of the lesion. This loss function helps the model improve segmentation accuracy for small lesions, which 

is particularly important for clinical diagnosis. By adjusting the weights 𝐀 1 and 𝐀 2 , we were able to fine-

tune the model to prioritize both pixel-level segmentation accuracy and lesion-level segmentation 

accuracy. 

Through the implementation of this hybrid loss function, we were able to significantly improve 

the model's ability to detect small and proliferative lesions, addressing the challenges posed by class 

imbalance and small lesion detection. The final model demonstrated strong feature extraction and 

segmentation capabilities, achieving robust performance across different lesion types, making it an 

effective tool for assisting pathologists in diagnosing gestational trophoblastic diseases. 

# GTDoctor - an Expert Model for GTD Diagnosis 

The visual model provides doctors with image modality analysis results, including extracted multi-

dimensional features and lesion segmentation results. Based on this foundation, we have designed a

decision and analysis model that combines image analysis results with textual information, such as patient 

case details, to provide comprehensive diagnostic results and pathological analysis. Together, they form 

the GTDoctor's auxiliary diagnostic process. The structure of the GTDoctor model is illustrated in Fig. 1a. 

It provides a final case-level diagnosis based on the analysis of pathological slide images and the patient's 

basic information, including diagnostic opinions and detailed pathological analysis. GTDoctor can 

integrate diagnostic and analysis results and generate diagnostic reports. 

For the decision and analysis model, on one hand, it needs to provide pathologists with a

judgment on the patient's condition, resulting in a definitive disease classification. On the other hand, the 17 

pathological analysis should be as comprehensive and detailed as possible, offering personalized 

recommendations based on the case information, which can provide doctors with more information to 

explain the condition to patients and consider treatment strategies. Therefore, it is necessary to combine 

structured and unstructured results to provide doctors with more comprehensive diagnostic support. To 

this end, we propose a new decision analysis framework, including a random forest model based on 

hybrid features and a directionally trained large language model. 

The random forest model analyzes and judges the features extracted by the visual model, 

combining the diagnostic experience of professional pathologists to output structured judgment results, 

including "Hydatidiform mole", "Choriocarcinoma" or "Normal abortion". In the feature selection phase, 

we combine manually selected artificial features with automatically extracted implicit features. The 

segmentation head output of the visual model provides segmentation results for different lesions. Based 

on these results, we collaborated with clinical doctors to select seven key artificial features: the number of 

edematous lesions, the number of hyperplastic lesions, the number of villi, the area ratio of edematous 

lesions, the area ratio of hyperplastic lesions, the proportion of abnormal villi, and the proportion of non-

blank areas. These features directly reflect key information in the pathological slides, providing a basis 

for classification decisions. The encoder of the visual model outputs a 768-dimensional feature map, 

which contains implicit features beneficial for analysis. We use Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 

(Supplementary Fig. 7) to reduce the dimensionality of the high-dimensional feature map, finally forming 

a three-channel feature heatmap (as shown in Fig. 2d) [40]. Through methods such as heatmap region 

statistics and shape factor analysis, we extracted 15 potential features for classification. The total of 22 

features we extracted combines the clinical expertise of pathologists with the potential patterns discovered 

by machine learning models through image analysis. Compared to relying on a single source of features, 

this hybrid feature selection method fully integrates interpretability and effectiveness, providing a more 

comprehensive basis for classification. During the training process, we used the training set from Cohort 

A-1. In terms of model structure, we used 20 CART decision trees with random feature selection, 18 

adopting the Bootstrap Aggregating (Bagging) integration strategy. Each decision tree's sample selection 

was random sampling with replacement, and the final classification result was determined by voting. 

We utilized the large language model ChatGPT-4 as the foundational framework for case analysis, 

capitalizing on its robust capabilities in instruction interpretation and text comprehension. To augment its 

specialized proficiency in pathological diagnosis, we implemented a retrieval-augmented generation 

(RAG) approach to provide the model with supplementary theoretical knowledge[41]. We developed a

high-quality, structured, and comprehensive literature database on gestational trophoblastic diseases, 

encompassing the latest research findings and authoritative guidelines pertaining to these conditions. This 

database comprises 45 key resources, including "Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of 

Gestational Trophoblastic Diseases" and "MRI Diagnosis and Pathological Correlation of Gestational 

Trophoblastic Diseases," which furnish the model with a comprehensive theoretical foundation and 

practical guidance. This ensures that the model integrates the most advanced medical knowledge when 

addressing diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. During the auxiliary diagnosis process, the model 

retrieves highly relevant information from the database based on the fundamental case details and lesion 

characteristics, selecting this as the training corpus for the large language model, thereby specifically 

enhancing its expertise in the field of pathology (Supplementary Fig. 5). 

The decision analysis framework we designed can combine the characteristics of structured and 

unstructured data, make judgments according to the logic of doctors' diagnostic experience, and provide 

in-depth interpretation of diagnostic results based on the latest medical research. This report provides 

strong decision support for clinicians and helps patients better understand their condition (Supplementary 

Fig. 4). 

# GTD iagnosis - an Intelligent Diagnostic Software System 

To better serve hospitals and specialists in different settings, we have developed a comprehensive 

auxiliary diagnostic software system for gestational trophoblastic diseases based on GTDoctor. We 

named it GTDiagnosis, with GTDoctor as its core. GTDiagnosis supports both English and Chinese, and 19 

the system interface is shown in Supplementary Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 3. The system has three 

main features. 

1) It supports multi-scenario applications. On one hand, our model can analyze whole slide 

images (WSI) obtained from digital pathology slide scanners. On the other hand, for hospitals in areas 

with less advanced medical capabilities, we provide a microscope-based diagnostic solution. Our system 

can capture real-time microscope field views and perform lesion identification and segmentation, 

displaying the multi-lesion label information in real-time within the system. Furthermore, we developed a

microscope historical field stitching module based on Fourier spectral transformation algorithms, which 

can intelligently stitch historical fields under the microscope and save the lesion segmentation results for 

further analysis, providing physicians with diagnostic assistance. 

2) It has the ability to evolve through online learning during clinical use. We have implemented 

an online learning algorithm utilizing mini-batch stochastic gradient descent (SGD), paired with a model 

fusion module. This approach enables the model to update its parameters continuously with new data 

collected during clinical usage. The new model parameters are then temporally fused with the existing 

model in a weighted manner, ensuring that the model retains its robustness while incorporating the 

learning from the new data. Temporal fusion helps maintain the balance between preserving prior 

knowledge and adapting to new patterns, thereby enhancing both generalization performance and the 

stability of the analysis outcomes. This design allows for the integration of new and valuable samples 

encountered during diagnoses. Doctors can revise the AI-generated labels based on clinical feedback and 

use these updated samples as training data for the model. Through this positive feedback loop, the model 

continuously refines itself over time, improving accuracy and adaptability. This method not only ensures 

that the model remains robust to variations in clinical data but also accelerates the system ’s long-term 

development and performance. 

3) It is user-friendly. We trained three pathologists on how to use GTDiagnosis, and they were 

able to master the system and use it proficiently in less than 20 minutes on average. We also conducted 20 

experiments to assess the impact of GTDiagnosis on the efficiency and accuracy of diagnoses, the results 

of which will be presented in a later section of this paper, and are very promising. Through the design of 

GTDiagnosis, we have provided a comprehensive, multi-dimensional solution for the auxiliary diagnosis 

of gestational trophoblastic diseases, improving the entire professional workflow from patient data import, 

large-model lesion segmentation and recognition, to intelligent decision-making, diagnosis, and pathology 

report generation. The usage process and application scenario of GTDiagnosis are shown in 

Supplementary Fig. 1. 

# Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Youth Project of Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. 

4254099) .

# Author contributions 

Yuhang Liu, Li Shi, Wenge Que designed the research plan. Yueyang Cang, Xingtong Wang, Xiaoteng 

Zhang and Pingge Hu executed the research plan and developed the model algorithms. Xinru Bai, 

Kuisheng Chen, Peiyu Xu, Lixia Zhang, Xinmin Li, Jingya Li and Qiaoting Xie annotated the lesion 

regions and organized the data. Yuhang Liu and Yueyang Cang and Xingtong Wang conducted the 

experiments and wrote the manuscript. Li Shi, Wenge Que and Xianxu Zeng revised and edited the 

manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version of the article. 

# Refere nces 

References should be numbered sequentially first throughout the text, then in tables, followed by figures 

and, finally, boxes. References may only contain citations and should list only one publication with each 

number. Examples: 21 

1. McCluggage, W. G., Singh, N. & Gilks, C. B. Key changes to the World Health Organization (WHO) 

classification of female genital tumours introduced in the fifth edition (2020). Histopathology 80 ,

762 –778 (2022). 

2. Chinese Anti-Cancer Association & Gynecological Oncology Professional Committee. Guidelines 

for the diagnosis and treatment of cervical cancer (2021 edition). Chinese Journal of Oncology 31 ,

474 –489 (2021). 

3. Hui, P. Gestational trophoblastic disease: general aspects. Gestational Trophoblastic Disease: 

Diagnostic and Molecular Genetic Pathology 1–14 (Springer, Berlin , 2012). 

4. Usui, H. Auxiliary and experimental diagnostic techniques for hydatidiform moles. Journal of 

Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research 48 , 3077 –3086 (2022). 

5. Ngan, H. Y. S. et al. Diagnosis and management of gestational trophoblastic disease: 2021 update. 

Int. J. Gynecol. Obstet . 155 , 86 –93 (2021). 

6. Shaaban, A. M. et al. Gestational trophoblastic disease: clinical and imaging features. Radiographics 

37 , 681 –700 (2017). 

7. Buza, N. & Hui, P. Immunohistochemistry and other ancillary techniques in the diagnosis of 

gestational trophoblastic diseases. Seminars in Diagnostic Pathology 31 , 223 –232 (WB Saunders, 

Philadelphia, 2014). 

8. National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China. China Health and Health Statistical 

Yearbook (National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China, Beijing, 2022). 

9. Oquab, M. et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. Preprint at 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.07193 (2023). 

10. Lu, M. Y., Chen, B., Williamson, D. F. K. et al. A visual-language foundation model for 

computational pathology. Nature Medicine 30 , 863 –874 (2024). 22 

11. Huang, Z. et al. A visual –language foundation model for pathology image analysis using medical 

twitter. Nature Medicine 29 , 2307 –2316 (2023). 

12. Chen, R. J. et al. Towards a general-purpose foundation model for computational pathology. Nature 

Medicine 30 , 850 –862 (2024). 

13. Xu, H. et al. A whole-slide foundation model for digital pathology from real-world data. Nature 630 ,

181 –188 (2024). 

14. Lu, M. Y., Chen, B., Williamson, D. F. K. et al. A multimodal generative AI copilot for human 

pathology. Nature 634 , 466 –473 (2024). 

15. Palee, P., Sharp, B., Noriega, L., Sebire, N. & Platt, C. Heuristic neural network approach in 

histological sections detection of hydatidiform mole. Journal of Medical Imaging 6, 044501 (2019). 

16. Zhu, C., Hu, P., Wang, X., Zeng, X. & Shi, L. A real-time computer-aided diagnosis method for 

hydatidiform mole recognition using deep neural network. Computer Methods and Programs in 

Biomedicine 23 4, 107510 (2023). 

17. Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P. & Brox, T. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image 

segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention –MICCAI 2015: 

18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 234 –241 

(Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2015). 

18. Zhou, Z. et al. Unet++: A nested u-net architecture for medical image segmentation. In Deep 

Learning in Medical Image Analysis and Multimodal Learning for Clinical Decision Support: 4th 

International Workshop, DLMIA 2018, and 8th International Workshop, ML-CDS 2018, Held in 

Conjunction with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 20, 2018, Proceedings 3–11 (Springer 

International Publishing, Cham, 2018). 23 

19. Wang, Z., Bian, H., Li, J. et al. Detection and subtyping of hepatic echinococcosis from plain CT 

images with deep learning: a retrospective, multicentre study. The Lancet Digital Health 5, e754 –

e762 (2023). 

20. Kresevic, S., Giuffr è, M., Ajcevic, M. et al. Optimization of hepatological clinical guidelines 

interpretation by large language models: a retrieval augmented generation-based framework. npj 

Digital Medicine 7, 102 (2024). 

21. Zhang, S. et al. Potential rapid intraoperative cancer diagnosis using dynamic full-field optical 

coherence tomography and deep learning: A prospective cohort study in breast cancer patients. 

Science Bulletin 69 , 1748 –1756 (2024). 

22. Zheng, X. et al. A deep learning model and human-machine fusion for prediction of EBV-associated 

gastric cancer from histopathology. Nature Communications 13 , 2790 (2022). 

23. Zhao, S. et al. Single-cell morphological and topological atlas reveals the ecosystem diversity of 

human breast cancer. Nature Communications 14 , 6796 (2023). 

24. Wang, G. et al. Metabolic detection and systems analyses of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 

through machine learning, lipidomics, and multi-omics. Science Advances 7, eabh2724 (2021). 

25. Soper, J. T. Gestational trophoblastic disease: current evaluation and management. Obstetrics &

Gynecology 137 , 355 –370 (2021). 

26. Niemann, I. et al. Gestational trophoblastic diseases —clinical guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, 

follow-up, and counselling. Danish Medical Journal 62 , C5082 (2015). 

27. Curry, S. L. et al. Hydatidiform mole: Diagnosis, management, and long-term followup of 347 

patients. Obstetrics & Gynecology 45 , 1–8 (1975). 

28. Hertig, A. T. & Sheldon, W. H. Hydatidiform mole —a pathologico-clinical correlation of 200 cases. 

American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 53 , 1–36 (1947). 24 

29. Petignat, P. et al. Is genetic analysis useful in the routine management of hydatidiform mole? Human 

Reproduction 18 , 243 –249 (2003). 

30. Vang, R. et al. Diagnostic reproducibility of hydatidiform moles: ancillary techniques (p57 

immunohistochemistry and molecular genotyping) improve morphologic diagnosis. The American 

Journal of Surgical Pathology 36 , 443 –453 (2012). 

31. Vaswani, A. et al. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 

(2017). 

32. Cheng, B., Schwing, A. & Kirillov, A. Per-pixel classification is not all you need for semantic 

segmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 , 17864 –17875 (2021). 

33. Cheng, B., Misra, I., Schwing, A. G. et al. Masked-attention mask transformer for universal image 

segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 

Recognition 1290 –1299 (2022). 

34. Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E. & Williams, R. J. Learning representations by back-propagating 

errors. Nature 323 , 533 –536 (1986). 

35. Lin, T. Y., Doll ár, P., Girshick, R. et al. Feature pyramid networks for object detection. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2117 –2125 

(2017). 

36. Chen, L. C., Zhu, Y., Papandreou, G., Schroff, F. & Adam, H. Encoder-decoder with atrous 

separable convolution for semantic image segmentation. In Proceedings of the European Conference 

on Computer Vision (ECCV) 801 –818 (2018). 

37. Bai, X., Wei, J., Starr, D. et al. Assessment of efficacy and accuracy of cervical cytology screening 

with artificial intelligence assistive system. Modern Pathology 37 , 100486 (2024). 25 

38. Dice, L. R. Measures of the amount of ecologic association between species. Ecology 26 , 297 –302 

(1945). 

39. Sudre, C. H., Li, W., Vercauteren, T., Ourselin, S. & Cardoso, M. J. Generalised dice overlap as a

deep learning loss function for highly unbalanced segmentations. In Deep Learning in Medical 

Image Analysis and Multimodal Learning for Clinical Decision Support: Third International 

Workshop, DLMIA 2017, and 7th International Workshop, ML-CDS 2017, Held in Conjunction with 

MICCAI 2017, Qu ébec City, QC, Canada, September 14, Proceedings 3 240 –248 (Springer 

International Publishing, 2017). 

40. Hotelling, H. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components. Journal of 

Educational Psychology 24 , 417 (1933). 

41. Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A. et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP 

tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 , 9459 –9474 (2020). 

# Competing interests 

## The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. 

# Supplementary Information 

Supplementary Information can be found in the compressed folder .26 

# Figures 

Fig. 1 Diagram of the overall structure of GTDoctor 

a The workflow of GTDoctor. The acquired H&E data is processed through the visual model for 

encoding, decoding, and segmentation. The segmentation results undergo statistical analysis and manual 

feature extraction. The output from the encoder also serves as part of the feature set input into a random 

forest decision model for diagnosis. Additionally, patient information and pathology slide details are 

provided to a domain-specific large language model for diagnostic analysis. Together, these components 

contribute to the final analysis results . b Algorithm structure of the Lesion Segmentation Vision Model, 27 

which captures lesion information at different scales through multi-scale feature encoding and hybrid 

attention mechanisms. AI: Artificial Intelligence. GTD: Gestational Trophoblastic Diseas . H&E: 

hematoxylin-eosin staining .

Fig. 2 Sample and workflow of the visual model 

a Edema , Hyperplasia , and Villi regions in the Whole Slide Image, with the annotated image shown on 

the right. b The lesion segmentation process based on two stages. c The field of view of the auxiliary 

diagnostic system under the microscope and the result after field stitching. d From top left to bottom right: 

the original pathology slide, the dimension-reduced feature heatmap, the segmented mask, and the final 

lesion display image from the auxiliary system. 28 

Fig. 3 Performance of GTDiagnosis in different tests. 29 

a ROC curves for pixel-level edema and hyperplasia lesion segmentation results (cohort A-2: internal test 

set, cohort B-1 to B5: external test sets). b The mprecision, mrecall, mdice, and miou scores of 

segmentation results (cohort A-2: internal test set, cohort B-1 to B5: external test sets). c Confusion 

matrix for disease diagnosis results across different cohorts, where 0 represents Normal abortion, 1

represents Hydatidiform mole, and 2 represents Choriocarcinoma (cohort A-2: internal test set, cohort B-1 

to B5: external test sets). d The effect of GTDiagnosis on the average diagnostic time and diagnostic 

accuracy for junior and senior pathologists (cohort C-1). 

# Tables 

Table 1 Baseline characteristics of patients included in this study (n=831 cases) 

Characteristic Total number 

Age (years )

≤19 12 (1.4%) 

20-29 281 (33.8%) 

30-39 435 (52. 4%) 

40-49 87 (10. 5%) 

50-59 16 (1.9%) 

Gestational Weeks (weeks )

≤4 11 (1.3%) 

5-7 339 (40. 8%) 

8-10 223 (26. 8%) 

11-13 46 (5. 5%) 

14-16 7 (0. 9%) 

Unknow 205 (24. 7%) 

Categories 

Normal abortion 165 (19. 9%) 

Hydatidiform mole 602 (72. 4%) 

Choriocarcinoma 64 (7.7%)