Title: The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.14003v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 02:31:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 

MINGCHENG ZHU, University of Oxford, UK 

YU LIU, University of Oxford, UK 

ZHIYAO LUO, University of Oxford, UK 

TINGTING ZHU, University of Oxford, UK The widespread adoption of electronic health records (EHRs) enables the acquisition of heterogeneous clinical data, spanning lab tests, vital signs, medications, and procedures, which offer transformative potential for artificial intelligence in healthcare. Although traditional modelling approaches have typically relied on multivariate time series, they often struggle to accommodate the inherent sparsity and irregularity of real-world clinical workflows. Consequently, research has shifted toward event stream representation, which treats patient records as continuous sequences, thereby preserving the precise temporal structure of the patient journey. However, the existing literature remains fragmented, characterised by inconsistent definitions, disparate modelling architectures, and varying training protocols. To address these gaps, this review establishes a unified definition of EHR event streams and introduces a novel taxonomy that categorises models based on their handling of event time, type, and value. We systematically review training strategies, ranging from supervised learning to self-supervised methods, and provide a comprehensive discussion of applications across clinical scenarios. Finally, we identify open critical challenges and future directions, with the aim of clarifying the current landscape and guiding the development of next-generation healthcare models. 

1 Introduction 

Electronic health records (EHRs) have become indispensable in modern healthcare, systematically capturing diverse and longitudinal patient information, including lab tests, vital signs, medications, diagnoses, and procedures [ 159 ]. It serves as a fundamental data source for artificial intelligence (AI) in medicine, supporting a range of applications such as disease detection [ 93 ], clinical outcome prediction [ 98 , 178 ], and personalised treatment recommendation [ 107 , 174 ]. Until now, most EHR modelling frameworks have continued to rely on multivariate time series representations, which require dividing records into fixed temporal bins and imputing missing values [ 56 , 56 , 146 ]. Although such an approach facilitates the adoption of well-established time series models, it often fails to capture the inherent sparsity and irregular periodicity of real-world clinical data [ 155 ], resulting in significant information loss and the introduction of systematic bias [ 176 ]. To overcome these limitations, a new representation called event streams has been proposed [ 89 ]. Specifically, medical records are treated as a chronological sequence of atomic clinical events defined by three core components: the occurrence time, the event type (such as a diagnosis or medication), and the associated value (such as a lab result). This structure preserves exact details in patient records and reconstructs the original patient journey in chronological order [ 5]. By inherently accommodating the irregularity and sparsity of clinical data, event streams bypass the requirement for division of records or imputation of missing values. Despite growing interest in event stream representation and EHR modelling, comprehensive reviews remain scarce. Existing surveys often suffer from notable scope limitations, particularly with respect to event stream definitions, modelling taxonomy, and clinical scenarios. As shown in Table 1, Shchur et al. [ 112 ] provides an early overview, but focuses exclusively on point process methods and lacks a formal definition of event streams. Amirahmadi et al. [ 3] defines event streams as sequences  

> Authors’ Contact Information: Mingcheng Zhu, mingcheng.zhu@eng.ox.ac.uk, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; Yu Liu, yu.liu@eng.ox.ac.uk, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; Zhiyao Luo, zhiyao.luo@eng.ox.ac.uk, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; Tingting Zhu, tingting.zhu@eng.ox.ac.uk, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
> arXiv:2603.14003v1 [eess.SP] 14 Mar 2026 111:2 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu

of hospital admissions, thereby overlooking finer-grained representations (e.g., hourly or event-level). Meanwhile, Zólyomi et al. [ 180 ] concentrates solely on self-supervised learning, neglecting a discussion of event stream modelling methods and the healthcare scenario. Consequently, the field lacks consensus on the fundamental definitions, modelling methods, training strategies, and clinical application scenarios, which impedes rigorous method comparison and practical adoption [3]. To address the aforementioned gaps, this review systematically examines EHR event streams to consolidate fragmented knowledge and establish a consensus in this field. Specifically, Section 2 details our literature search methodology. Section 3 defines the EHR event stream, discusses its key characteristics, and compares it with traditional multivariate time series representations. Section 4 introduces a taxonomy of modelling methods based on how they handle the time, type, and value of clinical events. Section 5 discusses training strategies, ranging from supervised learning designed for the prediction of specific clinical outcomes to self-supervised paradigms that leverage the intrinsic structure of the clinical sequence to learn patient representations based on tasks. Section 6 summarises clinical applications in various healthcare settings. Following this technical overview, Section 7 discusses open research questions for the representation and modelling of event streams. Section 8 outlines promising future research directions. Finally, Section 9 concludes the paper with reflections on current progress and opportunities of the EHR event streams. A summary of the papers reviewed is shown in Appendix Table 2. 

Table 1. Comparison of existing reviews on EHR event stream. ✓indicates coverage.                            

> Shchur et al. (2021) Amirahmadi et al. (2023) Zólyomi et al. (2025) This Work Modelling Taxonomy
> Time Modelling ✓✓✓
> Type Modelling ✓✓✓✓
> Value Modelling ✓✓✓
> Training Strategy
> Supervised ✓✓✓
> Self-Supervised ✓✓✓
> Healthcare Scenario
> Intensive Care Unit (ICU) ✓✓✓✓
> Emergency Department (ED) ✓
> Primary Care ✓✓
> Hospital/Secondary Care ✓

2 Searching Strategy 

The search process is illustrated in Figure 1. Articles were eligible if they represented EHRs as event streams for deep learning modelling in healthcare applications. We searched titles, abstracts, and keywords in Scopus, PubMed, IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital Library, and Google Scholar (January 2026) using: ("event stream*" OR "event sequence*" OR "clinical event*") AND ("deep learning" OR "machine learning" OR "Transformer" OR "large language model*" ) AND ("electronic health record*" OR "EHR" OR "electronic medical record*") Our search strategy was limited to articles written in English and appearing in peer-reviewed journals or conference proceedings. The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:3 

> Fig. 1. The flow diagram of the literature searching strategy.

3 Event Stream Representation of EHRs 3.1 Definition of Event Stream Representation 

An EHR event stream for a patient is defined as a chronologically ordered sequence of clinical events. It can be represented formally as: 

X = {𝑋 1, 𝑋 2, . . . , 𝑋 𝑄 }, where 𝑋 𝑞 = {𝑥 𝑞,𝑟 = (𝑡 𝑞 , 𝑐 𝑞,𝑟 , 𝑣 𝑞,𝑟 )} , 𝑡 1 < 𝑡 2 < · · · < 𝑡 𝑄 , (1) where 𝑡 𝑖 is the timestamp for each event and X𝑞 , called observation, is an unordered set of events that occur simultaneously in 𝑡 𝑞 . Each observation contains a set of tuples where 𝑐 𝑞,𝑟 ∈ C is the event type and 𝑣 𝑞,𝑟 is the corresponding value. EHR event streams exhibit several properties relevant to modelling and analysis: (1) Scope granularity – each observation 𝑋 𝑞 represents a flexible granularity level, which can correspond to a single clinical event, a fixed time window, or a hospital visit, allowing for an adaptable analysis depending on the clinical context. (2) Temporal ordering 

– the increasing sequence of timestamps ( 𝑡 1 < 𝑡 2 < · · · < 𝑡 𝑄 ) preserves the chronological order of clinical events. (3) Irregular timing – the timestamps 𝑡 𝑞 are not uniformly spaced, reflecting the inherent irregularity of clinical event occurrences in real-world settings. 

3.2 Advantages of Event Stream Representation 

The event stream representation preserves the original sequence and exact timing of all clinical events recorded in the EHRs. Clinical events are extracted and ordered chronologically. This approach provides a complete representation of the patient’s journey, as shown in Figure 2(b). In multivariate time series that are used in most EHR modelling methods, a predefined set of clinical variables is selected, and patient records are discretised into regular time intervals. Each variable is aligned with these intervals, with multiple aggregated values and missing values imputed as necessary to create a dense representation (Figure 2(c)). Formally, let T 𝑀 = {𝑡 𝑀  

> 1

, 𝑡 𝑀  

> 2

, . . . , 𝑡 𝑀 𝐿 } denote the sequence of 𝐿 regularly spaced time points, and let V𝑀 = {𝑣 𝑀  

> 1

, 𝑣 𝑀  

> 2

, . . . , 𝑣 𝑀 𝐷 } denote the set of 𝐷 

selected clinical variables. The multivariate time series for a patient is then represented as: 

X𝑀 = [𝑥 𝑀 𝑙,𝑑 ], X𝑀 ∈ R𝐿 ×𝐷 , (2) 111:4 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu Creatinine       

> Heart Rate (HR) 8:15
> MRI Brain
> Penicillin 9:50
> Penicilin
> Sodium 11:15
> HR Time
> Ventilation 13:00
> Pneumonia 14:15
> Creatinine
> (a) Raw EHR Data (b) Event Stream
> Hour 1
> (8:00-9:00)
> Hour 2
> (9:00-10:00)
> Hour 3
> (10:00-11:00)
> Hour 4
> (11:00-12:00)
> Hour 5
> (12:00-13:00)
> Hour 6
> (13:00-14:00)
> Hour 7
> (14:00-15:00)
> Creatinine (Lab) Heart Rate (Vital)
> Sodium (Lab)
> Penicillin (Medication)
> MRI Brain (Procedure) Ventilation (Procedure) Pneumonia (Diagnosis)
> Filtered Filtered Filtered Filtered
> (c) Multivariate Time Series
> Order by Time Feature Filtering & Imputation
> Legend
> Event Types
> Lab
> Vital
> Diagnosis
> Procedure
> Medication
> Imputed Value
> Co-occurring Event Special Symbols
> HR Creatinine Penicillin MRI Brain HR Sodium ... Arti fi cial Order

Fig. 2. Illustration of the event stream and multivariate time series representations of EHR. (a) Raw EHR Data: Clinical events spanning multiple heterogeneous types (e.g., vital signs, lab tests, medications, procedures, and diagnoses) are recorded at irregular, continuous timestamps. (b) Event Stream: All extracted clinical events are arranged chronologically into a sequence, with co-occurring events assigned an arbitrary relative order. (c) Multivariate Time Series: The data is converted into a structured grid by aligning variables to fixed time intervals (e.g., hourly windows). To reduce sparsity, features with a high missing rate are filtered out, and missing data for the retained variables are imputed, resulting in a dense, regularly sampled matrix. 

where 𝑥 𝑀 𝑙,𝑑 denotes the value of variable 𝑣 𝑀 𝑑 at time 𝑡 𝑀 𝑙 .The primary motivation for transitioning from multivariate time series to event stream represen-tations is to mitigate biases introduced by manual preprocessing, particularly those associated with feature selection and imputation. By circumventing these steps, the curation of the event stream minimises the risk of discarding pertinent information and introducing artificial patterns, enabling more faithful and generalisable modelling [102]. 

4 Event Stream Modelling Taxonomy 

This section establishes a systematic taxonomy for the modelling of EHR event streams. As defined in Equation (1), each clinical event is represented by the tuple 𝑥 = (𝑡, 𝑐, 𝑣 ), which encompasses its occurrence time 𝑡 , type 𝑐 , and associated value 𝑣 . Rather than presenting isolated architectures, we examine the modelling strategies designed for each of these fundamental event components, categorised into event time modelling and the joint modelling of event types and values. It is important to note that a complete model must employ specific strategies for both the temporal dynamics and the heterogeneous event type and values. 

4.1 Event Time Modelling 

Effectively capturing the temporal dynamics of patient trajectories is a core challenge in EHR event stream modelling. Existing methodologies for integrating event timestamps can be broadly categorised into two foundational paradigms: time-as-feature and time-as-event. The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:5 

> Fig. 3. Overview of event stream modelling. This overview categorises the field into three primary components, each highlighted using a distinct colour. Event stream modelling details the modelling methods for different components of an event. Training strategy outlines different learning paradigms for event stream models, including supervised and self-supervised methods. The application focuses on the different healthcare scenarios, including critical care, emergency department, hospital and secondary care, and primary care.

Time-as-feature In this approach, the timestamp 𝑡 is treated as a continuous input attribute associated with the type and value of the event. The fundamental objective is to transform this temporal information into a feature representation that can be integrated with clinical content to generate a unified event embedding. Methodologically, this is achieved through two mechanisms: explicit encoding, where dedicated modules extract temporal features, or implicit encoding, where temporal dynamics are captured by the sequential architecture of the model. Explicit modelling strategies typically design specific embedding modules to represent event time. The most prevalent approach uses dedicated embedding layers within the Transformer architecture [ 138 ], where the encoded timestamp is concatenated with the event type and value vectors to form a unified input representation [62, 116, 158]. Recently, rotary position embedding (RoPE) [ 126 ] has been adopted to encode event timestamps, incorporating absolute time information into the rotation of event embeddings [ 21 , 123 ]. RoPE enables the model to naturally capture relative temporal distances and extrapolate to future time horizons unseen during training, allowing models to learn from the temporal dynamics characteristic of longitudinal clinical histories. Beyond internal time encoding, some studies propose external modules for the integration of time and other features. For example, Wu et al. [ 149 ] introduced a gating mechanism to fuse timestamps with event type and value prior to input into recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [ 108 ]. This concept was further refined by subsequent studies [ 61 , 72 , 73 ], which designed RNN cells to explicitly modulate the information flow based on the temporal intervals between events. Additionally, some methods employ tokenisation, where timestamps are treated as discrete tokens and processed via Word2Vec [ 85 ] to generate semantic embeddings that inherently capture temporal context [70, 78, 103]. 111:6 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu 

In contrast to methods that rely on explicit time features, other architectures model temporal dynamics implicitly by leveraging the sequential order of the event stream. For Transformer models, this is achieved through positional encoding mechanisms, which assign a unique vector to each step to indicate its relative position within the sequence rather than its absolute timestamp [ 71 ,119 ]. Similarly, RNNs encode temporal progression implicitly through internal memory states that update recursively as the model traverses the sequence [ 8 , 88 , 151 ]. Furthermore, Coombes et al. [ 20 ] adapt genomics methodologies, generating embeddings by segmenting the sequence into overlapping substrings and using their frequency distributions to represent temporal patterns. A critical limitation of the implicit approaches is the co-occurring events as defined in Equation (1). Flattening X𝑞 into a linear sequence introduces artificial temporal dependencies, misleading the model by inferring causal relationships between concurrent events where none exist. To avoid imposing an arbitrary order, recent studies proposed graph-based representations. Specifically, the authors in [ 46 , 160 , 177 ] construct graphs where co-occurring events serve as nodes, allowing relationships to be captured in an order-agnostic manner. Features extracted by a graph neural network (GNN) are subsequently fed into a Transformer to model the temporal evolution of these graph states. In a different approach, Xie and Wu [ 156 ] integrates all events into a single global graph, utilising edges to model co-occurrence relationships across distinct timestamps. 

Time-as-event Unlike time-as-feature, the timestamp is treated as a distinct event within the sequence. Here, a special event type of time is introduced, typically represented as (𝑐 time , 𝑡 ), and is placed before the set of clinical events that occur at time 𝑡 . The time-as-event sequence Xtae is thus structured as a sequence of event sets: 

Xtae =



Xtae 

> 𝑞

𝑄 𝑞 =1 , where Xtae  

> 𝑞

= (𝑐 time , 𝑡 𝑞 ), (𝑐 𝑞, 1, 𝑣 𝑞, 1), . . . , (𝑐 𝑞,𝑚 𝑞 , 𝑣 𝑞,𝑚 𝑞 ) , (3) where Xtae  

> 𝑞

is the 𝑞 -th observation that occurs at time 𝑡 𝑞 , and 𝑚 𝑞 is the number of clinical events within that set. Although this formulation appears structurally distinct from the definition in Equation 1, where time is an intrinsic attribute of every tuple, the two representations are fun-damentally equivalent. The Time-as-event format merely factorises the shared timestamp. The original event set X𝑞 can be reconstructed by placing the timestamp 𝑡 𝑞 of the special time token on each associated clinical pair (𝑐 𝑞,𝑟 , 𝑣 𝑞,𝑟 ). Specifically, Renc et al. [ 102 ] designed a vocabulary with special time interval tokens, representing durations ranging from five minutes to over six months. These tokens are inserted at the beginning of each co-occurring event set to explicitly demarcate temporal boundaries. The entire sequence is then processed by a GPT-2 architecture [ 97 ] using an autoregressive objective, enabling the model to dynamically determine whether to generate a subsequent clinical event within the current timestamp or a time token signifying a transition to the next observation. In a text-centric approach, authors in [ 14 , 150 , 179 ] serialise the timestamp, event types, and values into a unified natural-language text, with the timestamp serving as the initial context. This composite text is subsequently processed by a large language model (LLM), allowing the temporal dynamics to be interpreted through the model’s semantic understanding. 

Summary The fundamental distinction between time-as-feature and time-as-event lies in the modelling of a shared timestamp 𝑡 𝑞 within an observation X𝑞 . The time-as-feature method integrates 

𝑡 𝑞 directly into every atomic event tuple, ensuring that each event representation preserves its full temporal context independently. However, this results in representational redundancy, as the identical timestamp is encoded repeatedly for all co-occurring events. In contrast, the time-as-event approach factorises the observation by representing 𝑡 𝑞 as a single distinct token that precedes the set of associated clinical events. Although this eliminates redundancy, it creates a contextual dependency. The temporal grounding of a clinical event is no longer intrinsic to its individual embedding, but must be inferred from the preceding time token via the model’s The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:7 

sequential processing mechanism. The choice between these two approaches should be determined by the modelling objective. When the goal is to extract meaningful event embeddings, the time-as-feature representation is generally more appropriate. It assigns to each event an explicit temporal attribute, allowing the model to jointly learn the relationship between time, event types, and the corresponding values [ 158 ]. In contrast, for generative modelling or sequence forecasting tasks, the time-as-event representation is often more effective. By treating time as a distinct event that precedes a group of co-occurring events, this approach enables the model to predict not only what events will occur next but also when they will occur, facilitating the joint generation of temporal and clinical dynamics [102]. 

4.2 Event Type and Value Modelling 

The modelling of the type of event 𝑐 and the value 𝑣 is inherently coupled, as the semantic meaning of an event value is linked to its associated type. A fundamental challenge in this domain is the heterogeneity of clinical data. The vast combination of event types and values results in a representation space that is both high-dimensional and sparse. To address this complexity, existing strategies can be classified into three distinct categories: type-only modelling, type with value modelling, and multimodal modelling. These categories represent a trend of increasing heterogeneity, advancing from simplified abstractions that consider only categorical types to complex frameworks that integrate continuous values and unstructured modalities. 

Type-only Modelling 

In this approach, only the type of event 𝑐 is modelled, while the value of event 𝑣 is ignored. Each event is represented solely by its type, simplifying the modelling process. Formally, the event stream is represented as: 

Xto = {Xto  

> 𝑞

}𝑄 𝑞 =1, Xto  

> 𝑞

= xto  

> 𝑞,𝑟

= (𝑡 𝑞 , 𝑐 𝑞,𝑟 ) |Xto    

> 𝑞 |
> 𝑟 =1

, 𝑡 1 < 𝑡 2 < · · · < 𝑡 𝑄 . (4) A prominent approach models the type-only event stream using the temporal point process (TPP) [ 112 ]. The TPP models explicitly quantify the temporal dependencies between the types of clinical events within the continuous-time formalism [ 25 ]. The central component is the conditional intensity function, which defines the instantaneous probability of an event of type 𝑐 occurring at time 𝑡 𝑖 , conditioned on historical observations H𝑡 𝑖 = {X𝑞 | 𝑡 𝑞 < 𝑡 𝑖 }. Formally, this is defined as: 

𝜆 𝑐 (𝑡 𝑖 | H 𝑡 𝑖 ) = 𝜇 𝑐 + 

> | H 𝑡 𝑖 |

∑︁  

> 𝑞 =1
> |X𝑞 |

∑︁  

> 𝑟 =1

𝛼 𝑞,𝑟,𝑐 , 𝑔 (𝑡 𝑖 − 𝑡 𝑞 ), (5) where 𝜇 𝑐 represents the baseline intensity of type 𝑐 , and the nested summation aggregates the influence of all historical events in H𝑡 𝑖 . The parameter 𝛼 𝑞,𝑟,𝑐 measures the excitation effect that a previous event type 𝑐 𝑞,𝑟 exerts on the current type 𝑐 , while 𝑔 (·) denotes a temporal kernel function describing how this influence decays over time [ 33 ]. Classical implementations, such as the Hawkes process [ 112 ], utilise this formulation to predict the precise timing of target events [ 33 , 147 ]. More recently, hybrid architectures have emerged that integrate deep learning with TPPs. These studies typically employ neural networks to extract dense embeddings for time and type, which are subsequently fed into the TPP intensity function to enhance predictive performance [ 105 , 156 ]. Similarly, Song and Liu [ 124 ] developed a Transformer-based model to encode the sequence of past observations H𝑡 𝑖 , using the resulting contextual representation to parameterise the intensity function for future event prediction. Another approach leverages a Transformer to process the event stream as a flat sequence of distinct input units. In this framework, each token represents a composite embedding that integrates both the event timestamp and its clinical type [ 89 , 169 ]. To preserve the hierarchical nature of 111:8 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu 

patient history, these models often introduce a dedicated "visit segment" embedding. This feature serves as an explicit boundary marker, allowing the model to distinguish between separate clinical encounters while processing the continuous stream. Alternatively, hierarchical architectures [ 7 , 96 ]have been developed to explicitly model these distinct temporal scales. These systems typically employ a dual-level mechanism: a lower-level RNN captures local, short-range dependencies among events within a single visit, while a higher-level additive attention mechanism [ 6 ] aggregates these visit representations to model long-range clinical evolution throughout the patient’s entire history. A third approach quantifies event occurrences within an observation X𝑞 , using these counts as features. For example, the authors [ 20 , 46 ] transform event streams into event count sequences, which are then used to measure patient similarity. Specifically, Wang et al. [ 142 ] first aggregated administered medications and adverse drug effects into visit-level count vectors. This sequence is then fed into an auto-regressive Transformer [ 97 ] to predict the conditional probability of events in the next visit, enabling the generation of synthetic patient trajectories for digital twin applications. 

Type and Value Modelling 

This approach jointly models the type of event 𝑐 and its corresponding value 𝑣 . A central challenge in this domain is the heterogeneity of clinical values, which encompasses both categorical values (i.e., demographics or medical intervention) and continuous numerical values (i.e., vital signs). Existing methodologies are primarily distinguished by their treatment of continuous data, which is typically managed through either discretisation into categorical values or encoding of continuous values. One approach discretises continuous event values into categorical bins. For example, the authors in [ 101 , 102 ] convert continuous values into quantile-based bins. Each bin is then treated as an independent token that follows the main event type token. This modelling paradigm unifies the format for both categorical and continuous events and separates the value from the type, thereby reducing model complexity. Similarly, Lin et al. [ 69 ] combine descriptive and continuous values, segmenting them into distinct chunks, each of which is treated as an independent token for Transformer-based prediction. Alternative approaches preserve the full resolution of continuous values by encoding them directly. The authors in [ 90 , 131 , 151 ] use a dedicated numerical encoder to produce a value embedding, which is subsequently concatenated with the event type and timestamp representations to form a comprehensive vector. Building upon this framework, Xu et al. [ 158 ] developed a triplet encoding mechanism composed of three parallel processing heads. This architecture simultaneously employs a discrete embedding layer for categorical types, a linear projection for continuous values, and a trigonometric encoding module for temporal information. These heterogeneous features are then fused to generate a unified event embedding, which is processed by a Transformer to model the sequence. 

Multimodal Modelling Conceptually, multimodal modelling can be viewed as an advanced extension of type and value modelling. While standard value modelling handles low-dimensional numerical or categorical results, the event value 𝑣 can also encompass highly complex, unstructured data associated with specific event types 𝑐 . For example, a radiology event yields a high-dimensional medical image (e.g., X-rays, CT scans), and a consultation event generates free-text clinical notes or bio-signals. Multimodal modelling has its own distinct category due to the architectural necessity of employing modality-specific encoders to process these heterogeneous values before they can be integrated into the chronological event stream. Current multimodal modelling for EHR event streams focuses predominantly on integrating structured EHR data with unstructured clinical text. The most straightforward strategy is direct concatenation, where separate embedding vectors generated for the event stream and clinical notes are joined to form a single, contiguous input representation [ 37 , 69 ]. Similarly, Li et al. [ 66 ]implement early-stage fusion by projecting multimodal features within each day into unified embeddings prior to sequence processing. Alternatively, taking the event stream from the EHR The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:9 

and clinical text as two parallel sources, Lu et al. [ 79 ] employs cross-attention mechanisms, with clinical events serving as active queries that selectively attend to the relevant sections of the unstructured clinical notes. This architecture allows the model to fuse information based on semantic relevance. Ding et al. [ 26 ] propose a knowledge distillation method that uses LLMs to process clinical text and subsequently transfer the resulting semantic embeddings to train the event stream model. Moving beyond EHR data and clinical text, Lee et al. [ 62 ] addresses the challenge of high-dimensional heterogeneity by combining EHR data, X-ray images, and text. Their method projects all modalities into the shared latent space with linear projection and utilises special tokens for different modalities. These special tokens act as bridges, compressing and routing information across the different modality-specific encoders to generate the patient representation. 

Summary The strategies mentioned above highlight a fundamental trade-off between archi-tectural complexity and semantic granularity and the modalities of the representation. Type-only modelling prioritises computational simplicity by abstracting events into categorical tokens, thereby discarding specific measurement details. In contrast, type and value modelling enhance informa-tional fidelity by integrating numerical measurements. Multimodal modelling represents the highest degree of complexity, necessitating specialised encoders to process unstructured data, such as clinical notes and medical imaging, and the module of modality integration. A discernible trend in the field is the progression from simplified type-only abstractions toward comprehensive mul-timodal modelling methods. This evolution is propelled by two primary drivers: the availability of large-scale, multi-source EHR datasets and the evolution of deep learning architectures. Mod-ern architectures, particularly Transformers and pre-trained LLMs, now possess the capacity to effectively synthesise high-dimensional, multimodal inputs, enabling the construction of holistic patient representations that were previously computationally infeasible. 

5 Training Strategies for EHR Event Stream Models 

Training strategies for EHR event stream models can be broadly categorised into two main paradigms: supervised learning and self-supervised learning. Supervised learning involves training models on labelled datasets, where each event stream is associated with specific outcomes or labels. Self-supervised learning takes advantage of the inherent structure of the event streams to create the pretraining task, enabling models to learn useful representations without explicit labels. 

5.1 Supervised Learning 

In supervised learning, a deep learning model is trained to map input event streams to downstream tasks. Formally, given a dataset of 𝑀 patients, where each patient 𝑗 is represented by an event stream X𝑗 and an associated label 𝑦 𝑗 , the model is trained to minimise a loss function. The overall supervised loss is defined as: 

Lsupervised =

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

ℓ  𝑓 𝜃 (X 𝑗 ), 𝑦 𝑗 

, (6) where 𝑓 𝜃 is the deep learning model for event stream modelling, and ℓ (· , ·) is a task-specific loss function. Specifically, the authors in [ 28 , 64 , 83 ] formulate future event prediction as a classification task and train the model using the cross-entropy loss. In contrast, other works [ 19 , 36 , 96 ] focus on continuous targets, formulating the prediction of future measurement values as regression tasks using mean squared error (MSE) or root mean squared error (RMSE), and similarly treating time-to-event prediction as a regression in the time interval Δ𝑡 . Furthermore, the authors in [ 8 , 72 ]adopt a multi-task learning strategy, training a shared event stream encoder with distinct prediction heads to simultaneously optimise a weighted sum of the individual task losses. 111:10 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu (b) Masked Reconstruction                          

> Event Stream Model t1 t2 t3 t4 t1 Mask t3 Mask
> Event Stream Model
> t1 t2 t3 t4 t2 t3
> (c) Skip-gram Training (n=1)
> t2
> t3
> Event Stream Model
> t1 t2 t3
> t1 t1 t2 t2 t3
> t1 t2 t2 t3
> Event Replacement
> Positive (d) Contrastive Learning (with co-occuring event 2 and 3) (a) Next-token Prediction Oiriginal
> t1 t2 t2 t3
> Negative
> Event Swap
> Event Stream Model
> max(similarity)
> min(similarity)
> Legend
> Vital Lab Diagnosis Medication

Fig. 4. Illustration of self-supervised learning methods for EHR event stream modelling. The four main approaches are: (a) Next-token prediction, where the model learns to predict the subsequent event in the sequence given the preceding events. (b) Masked reconstruction, where events in the input sequence are deliberately hidden (masked), and the model is trained to reconstruct the complete sequence. (c) Skip-gram (𝑛 = 1), where the model uses a single target event (e.g., 𝑡 2) to predict its surrounding context events (e.g., 𝑡 1

and 𝑡 3). (d) Contrastive learning, which trains the model to maximise the embedding similarity between an original sequence and a positive pair that are generated via event swapping of co-occurring events, while minimising the similarity against a negative pair that is generated via event replacement. 

5.2 Self-supervised Learning 

Self-supervised can be further categorised into four main approaches, as illustrated in Figure 4: 

next-token prediction , masked reconstruction , skip-gram training , and contrastive learning . Each approach leverages the intrinsic structure of the event stream to create pretraining tasks that enable models to learn meaningful representations without relying on explicit labels. 

Next-token Prediction Next-token prediction trains a model to predict the subsequent event in a sequence given all preceding events [ 97 ], as illustrated in Figure 4(b). This approach encourages the model to learn the temporal dependencies and sequential patterns within the event stream. Formally, the model is trained to minimise the following prediction loss: 

Lnext = 

> 𝑁 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

ℓ   ˆx𝑖 +1, x𝑖 +1

, (7) where ˆx𝑖 +1 is the prediction of the next event by the model, conditioned on the history of events up to x𝑖 . Implementation strategies vary according to the granularity of the prediction target. The authors in [ 77 , 129 , 161 ] formulate the task as a prediction of the next-visit, where the objective is to foresee the entire set of events in the subsequent observation X𝑞 +1, conditioned on the sequence of previous visits completed {X1, . . . , X𝑞 }. Alternatively, other methods [ 35 , 161 ] operate at the atomic event level, training the model to predict the specific next item 𝑥 𝑞,𝑟 +1 within an observation X𝑞 . In these methods, the conditioning context comprises the history of prior observations {X1, . . . , X𝑞 −1 }

augmented by the local sequence of events {𝑥 𝑞, 1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑞,𝑟 } already processed within the current observation X𝑞 . Other works adapt event embeddings for use with pretrained LLMs via next-token prediction. For example, Wu et al. [ 150 ] embeds each event using ClinicalBERT [ 43 ] and adapts these event embeddings for pretrained LLMs using a linear projection layer. The linear projection layer is trained to predict the next event in the sequence. Similarly, Ding et al. [ 26 ] develops a specific encoder for events and trains this encoder to align with the hidden states of a pretrained LLM using next-token prediction. In addition, Zhu et al. [ 179 ] designs a specific tokenisation method The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:11 

for clinical events and integrates these tokens into the embedding space of a pretrained LLM with next-token prediction training. 

Masked Reconstruction The masked reconstruction approach involves masking certain parts of the input event stream and training the model to reconstruct the original unmasked data [ 24 ], as illustrated in Figure 4(a). By learning to predict this missing information, the model captures the underlying structure of the event stream and the relationships among events. Formally, given an event stream, a subset of its events is randomly masked to create a corrupted version, ˜X. The model is then trained to minimise the reconstruction loss: 

Lrecon =

> 𝑄

∑︁  

> 𝑞 =1
> |X𝑞 |

∑︁  

> 𝑟 =1

Imasked (𝑞, 𝑟 ) · ℓ   ˆx𝑞,𝑟 , x𝑞,𝑟 

, (8) where Imasked (𝑞, 𝑟 ) is an indicator function that equals 1 if event x𝑞,𝑟 is masked, ˆx𝑞,𝑟 is the model’s reconstruction of that masked event, and ℓ (· , ·) is a suitable loss function (e.g., cross-entropy for categorical events or MSE for continuous values). Specifically, the authors in [ 53 , 54 , 89 , 91 ] apply masked reconstruction to event streams by randomly masking the event time and type within each observation X𝑞 . The model is trained to reconstruct these masked events based on the surrounding context. Another approach [ 158 ] further masks the event values, training the model to reconstruct the event time and type with a cross-entropy loss and the event value with an MSE loss. Other approaches [ 69 , 169 ] combine masked reconstruction with adversarial training to mitigate the distribution shift among patient groups from different hospitals or with different admission times. 

Skip-gram Training Skip-gram training draws inspiration from natural language processing, where the model learns to predict surrounding words given a target word [ 85 ], as illustrated in Figure4(c). In the context of EHR event streams, the model is trained to predict neighbouring events based on a target event, thereby capturing contextual relationships within the event stream. Formally, for each event x𝑖 in the sequence, the model is trained to minimise the following loss: 

Lskip-gram = −   

> 𝑁 nei (𝑖 )

∑︁ 

> 𝑗

log 𝑃 (x𝑗 | x𝑖 ), (9) where 𝑁 nei (𝑖 ) denotes the set of neighbouring events within a predefined context window around event x𝑖 , and 𝑃 (x𝑗 | x𝑖 ) is the probability of event x𝑗 given the target event x𝑖 . Implementation of this strategy typically focuses on learning dense vector representations for clinical concepts. Specifically, multiple studies [ 38 , 70 , 153 ] adopt the event-as-token paradigm to generate event embeddings. By optimising the prediction of co-occurring or temporally adjacent events within a specified window, these models effectively capture the semantic and sequential associations between different clinical codes in a data-driven manner. 

Contrastive Learning Contrastive learning functions by generating alternative views of the event stream and training the model to pull semantically similar (positive) pairs together while pushing dissimilar (negative) pairs apart [ 42 ]. Formally, for a given anchor event stream X, the framework generates a positive sample X+ (typically via data augmentation) and identifies a set of 

𝐾 negative samples {X − 

> 𝑘

}𝐾 𝑘 =1, which are often drawn from other sequences in the same training batch. The model is optimised to minimise the contrastive loss, defined as: 

Lcontrastive = − log 𝑒 sim (𝑓 𝜃 ( X) ,𝑓 𝜃 ( X + ) ) 

𝑒 sim (𝑓 𝜃 ( X) ,𝑓 𝜃 ( X + ) ) + Í𝐾 𝑘 =1 𝑒 sim (𝑓 𝜃 ( X) ,𝑓 𝜃 ( X −  

> 𝑘 ) )

, (10) where 𝑓 𝜃 (·) denotes the encoder network, sim (· , ·) is a similarity metric (such as cosine similarity). This objective ensures that the model learns a representation space in which the anchor is aligned 111:12 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu 

closer to its positive variant than to any of the 𝐾 negative distinct sequences. Contrastive learning methods vary primarily in how they construct positive pairs. One common strategy is data aug-mentation. The authors in [ 67 , 168 ] generate positive samples by randomly cropping or masking parts of the original event stream. Specifically, a positive view is created by masking individual events or dropping entire observations, while negative samples are drawn from the event streams of unrelated individuals. This forces the model to recognise the patient’s trajectory despite missing information. A second strategy exploits the inherent permutation invariance of co-occurring events. Ma et al. [ 81 ] construct positive samples randomly by shuffling the order of events within a single observation X𝑞 . Since the events within an observation occur concurrently, their specific seriali-sation in the data stream is an artefact of recording rather than a meaningful temporal sequence. Consequently, this approach trains the model to generate consistent representations invariant to these arbitrary permutations, ensuring that the embedding captures the composition of the event set rather than an artificial order. A third approach leverages temporal consistency within the patient’s history. The authors in [ 90 , 172 ] divide the event stream into sub-sequences based on time windows or visit boundaries. In this setup, the model maximises the similarity between two different sub-sequences belonging to the same patient (positive pair) while minimising the similarity with sub-sequences from different patients (negative pair). This encourages the model to learn patient-specific features that remain stable over different time points. 

Summary Although all self-supervised learning strategies share the goal of leveraging unla-belled data, they differ in their training objectives and downstream utility. Next-token prediction focuses on modelling sequential dependencies and temporal evolution. These methods are particu-larly effective for forecasting tasks (e.g., predicting future diagnoses) or when using autoregressive architectures such as Transformers that require a deep understanding of the trajectory of the patient [ 100 , 102 ]. In contrast, associative approaches like masked reconstruction and skip-gram training prioritise local semantic relationships. By treating events as words in a context window, this method excels at capturing the co-occurrence similarities between clinical events, making it ideal for generating static code embeddings or representations where long-range temporal structure is less critical [ 38 ]. Finally, contrastive learning focuses on separation and invariance. By explicitly distinguishing between positive and negative sample pairs, this strategy is well-suited for tasks requiring robust whole-sequence representations, such as patient similarity search or classification under noisy conditions where permutation invariance for co-occurring events is beneficial [ 2 ]. In summary, the choice of strategy depends on the specific modelling requirements: next-token prediction is superior for temporal dynamics, masked reconstruction and skip-gram are good for semantic embedding, and contrastive learning for robust global representation. 

6 Healthcare Applications of EHR Event Stream 

Event stream modelling has been adopted across a wide range of healthcare settings, addressing both acute and chronic care needs. Different scenarios present unique characteristics of event streams and have different interests in terms of clinical tasks and outcomes. 

Critical Care Critical care, particularly in the intensive care unit (ICU), treats patients with life-threatening acute conditions that require continuous monitoring and intervention [ 117 ]. The ICU event streams are characterised by extremely frequent measurements, high event density, and the presence of severe or anomalous events [ 48 ]. Most articles focus on the prediction of risk, including the prediction of mortality, readmission, and the early risk of diseases such as sepsis and heart failure. For example, previous work has used the Transformer to aggregate visit-level embeddings for the prediction of heart failure at the next visit [ 169 ], point process models to model the intensity function for mortality and septic shock [ 54 ], and RNNs that extract sequential hidden states for in-hospital mortality and abnormal laboratory test detection [ 144 ]. Other works have explored The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:13 

CNN-RNN hybrids that combine local feature extraction with temporal aggregation to predict mortality at various time points during an ICU stay [ 74 ], and attention-based models that compute weighted sums of historical events for readmission from the ICU and the onset of sepsis [ 8 , 116 ]. Another major application is multi-label diagnosis and medication recommendation, where models are designed to predict the set of diagnoses or medications in the future. Mei et al. [ 83 ] developed a Transformer model to capture dependencies between co-occurring codes for next-visit prediction, while others [ 32 , 79 ] have addressed multi-label diagnosis and prescription recommendation using RNN-based and hybrid models that map the final hidden state to a multi-label output space. As clinical conditions fluctuate rapidly and interventions have immediate consequences in ICUs, the application of generating plausible future event sequences is critical for advanced modelling. This capability is used primarily for counterfactual simulation, as demonstrated by Wang et al. [ 145 ]. By modelling "what-if" scenarios, these systems allow clinicians to estimate how a patient’s trajectory might diverge under varying intervention strategies, providing a computational basis for personalised treatment planning. Furthermore, trajectory generation addresses the stringent privacy constraints inherent in ICU data. By creating synthetic patient records that preserve the statistical fidelity of real populations without exposing sensitive information, these methods facilitate the safe development and benchmarking of clinical algorithms across institutions [77, 131]. 

Emergency Department The emergency department (ED) is the main entry point for patients who need urgent or unscheduled care [ 135 ]. EDs are characterised by short event streams, a large volume of multimodal data, and significant variability in patient presentations and acuity levels [ 118 ]. In the emergency department, where rapid and precise diagnosis is paramount, the primary focus of research is the prediction of acute clinical events and early diagnosis. The authors in [ 23 , 40 ] leverage event sequences to identify imminent risks, such as opioid poisoning, sepsis, acute heart failure, and pneumonia, thereby assisting clinicians in prioritising patients for immediate intervention. Beyond clinical decision support, significant attention is directed towards optimising operational efficiency and patient flow. Given the frequent overcrowding in the emergency department, predicting workflow outcomes becomes critical. The authors in [ 36 , 136 ] address this by forecasting patient length-of-stay (LoS) and detecting deviations in clinical workflows. These applications provide vital intelligence for resource allocation, bed management, and the maintenance of standard operating protocols within the fast-paced ED environment. 

Hospital/Secondary Care The hospital and secondary care scenario involves the man-agement and treatment of hospitalised patients, which includes a wide spectrum of conditions, procedures, and interventions [ 104 ]. In-hospital event streams are characterised by hourly records and sequences that span a few days or weeks. A major application of event stream modelling in hospitals is the prediction of mortality, readmission, and disease risk. Previous work has predicted in-hospital mortality [ 60 ], 30-day readmission [ 86 ], acute kidney injury [ 132 ], and the onset of chronic diseases [ 153 ]. These models employ recurrent or attention-based encoders to transform the entire patient history into a single risk vector to enable early identification of high-risk patients and support timely clinical interventions. Diagnosis and medication recommendation represent another key area, where event stream models are used to predict future diagnoses, comorbidities, or medication orders for future visits [ 7 ]. Previous work has applied RNN-based [ 127 ] and attention-based [ 172 ] models to capture longitudinal dependencies by projecting the aggregated context into a multi-label output space, facilitating more accurate and personalised care planning. Generative modelling and next-event forecasting have also been explored. Clustering of patients has been studied using graph-based methods [ 46 , 89 ] and embedding-based methods [ 87 ]. These approaches identify clinically similar patients based on their embeddings of the event stream, supporting cohort identification, risk stratification, and tailored treatment recommendations. 111:14 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu 

Primary Care Primary care serves as the initial point of contact and the central hub for patient management, covering a wide spectrum of preventive, acute, and chronic health services [ 115 ]. In this context, data are usually recorded at the day-level granularity, span years, and exhibit high variability in event frequency due to the irregular nature of patient visits [ 12 ]. Existing work has focused primarily on the prediction of chronic disease onset and the alignment of multimodal information. For example, the authors in [ 18 , 67 ] use Transformer and RNN to aggregate longitudinal patterns from historical event sequences and to predict whether a patient will develop a target disease, such as heart failure, within a specified time frame following a baseline date. In addition, Seinen et al. [ 109 ] has used embedding-based approaches that map diverse data types into a shared semantic space to quantify the complementarity of information across different EHR modalities, including structured records and clinical notes. These studies demonstrate the feasibility of applying event stream models to large-scale primary care datasets, supporting both risk prediction and the integration of heterogeneous data sources to improve continuity and quality of care. 

Summary The scenarios most widely studied are critical care and hospital/secondary care, reflecting the high availability of rich EHR datasets such as MIMIC [ 47 ]. The ED scenario also has publicly available datasets, although the multimodal and variable nature of ED data presents unique modelling challenges [ 118 ]. Primary care remains less explored, likely due to the scarcity of large-scale, high-quality datasets that capture extended patient histories across diverse settings. Regarding clinical applications, the existing literature is predominantly anchored in prediction tasks, most notably mortality, readmission, and disease onset [ 98 , 158 ]. Although these objectives are clinically vital, they often reduce complex patient trajectories to single static outcomes, thereby underutilising the intrinsic capabilities of event stream modelling. The distinct advantage of this paradigm lies in its ability to capture the continuous temporal evolution and granular dependencies between specific clinical events—nuances that are typically lost in aggregate prediction. Consequently, there is a significant but under-explored opportunity to move beyond binary or multi-class risk stratification. Recently, some work has begun to bridge this gap by addressing dynamic, process-oriented tasks, including estimating causal treatment effect [ 50 ], optimising clinical pathway [ 31 ], and precise scenario-specific forecasting [175]. 

7 Open Research Challenges 

Co-occurring Events A fundamental challenge in modelling EHR event streams is the handling of co-occurring clinical events. Although sequential architectures such as RNNs and Transformers presuppose strict temporal order ( 𝑡 1 < 𝑡 2 < · · · < 𝑡 𝑛 ), clinical workflows frequently generate multiple observations recorded at the same timestamp [ 119 ]. These simultaneous events constitute an unordered set, and their relative arrangement in sequences is clinically irrelevant. This creates a structural conflict with standard deep learning models: to process these events, they must be forced into an arbitrary sequence, which risks the model incorrectly interpreting this artificial order as a meaningful temporal dependency. Existing approaches rely on two main strategies to accommodate this modality, each with notable drawbacks. The first strategy aggregates co-occurring events into a single timestep representation, using techniques like multi-hot encoding or composite tokens [ 16 , 20 , 38 , 45 ]. However, this aggregation inherently leads to information loss, as it conflates clinical entities into a single vector and often discards the specific values associated with individual event types. The second strategy linearises the set by imposing an artificial order, often employing random shuffling or permutation-invariant layers to mitigate order sensitivity [ 66 , 71 , 81 , 104 , 168 ]. Despite these efforts, imposing an artificial sequence can lead to divergent representations and spurious causal inferences. For example, event stream models can incorrectly take a systolic blood pressure as the cause of a simultaneous diastolic reading due to its position [ 49 ]. Moreover, this The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:15 

transformation exponentially expands the input space (a set of 𝑚 events admits 𝑚 ! permutations), which complicates the learning task especially for complex clinical patterns. 

Long Context EHRs can span decades, resulting in event streams that far exceed the con-text window limits of standard deep learning architectures [ 148 , 179 ]. While many traditional approaches aggregate history into coarser representations, event stream modelling aims to preserve the granularity of individual events as tokens in a timeline. This leads to sequences that can easily reach hundreds of thousands of tokens, making standard attention mechanisms computationally intractable at scale [ 179 ]. This limitation forces a trade-off between history and granularity. Simply truncating the sequence to fit the model’s input limit risks discarding long-term historical con-text, which is crucial to understanding the patient’s baseline risk [ 148 ]. In contrast, prioritising long-term history may require compressing or down-sampling recent acute events, potentially obscuring immediate clinical deterioration [ 179 ]. Developing mechanisms to efficiently balance the representation of distant history with recent high-frequency events remains an open challenge. 

The Cold-Start Problem and Information Sufficiency A critical limitation of event stream models is their reliance on extensive historical context to generate robust representations. In real-world clinical practice, healthcare systems frequently encounter the "cold-start" problem: patients presenting for the first time with little to no prior recorded medical history [ 128 ]. While architectures such as Transformers excel at finding patterns across long patient journeys, their performance often degrades significantly when forced to make high-stakes predictions based on highly sparse, single-visit data [ 67 , 128 ]. This raises the unresolved question of information sufficiency: how much data is sufficient for a model to make reliable clinical inferences? Existing literature often side-steps this issue by applying arbitrary minimum-length thresholds for patient inclusion during dataset preprocessing, effectively excluding the population with limited data from the training and evaluation phases [ 137 ]. Consequently, models may become over-reliant on the sheer volume of historical events rather than the acute, immediate signals critical for early intervention. Developing architectures that can dynamically quantify their own uncertainty and maintain robust predictive performance even at the very beginning of a patient’s clinical trajectory remains a major open challenge [15]. 

Error Accumulation and Clinical Plausibility A key advantage of event stream modelling is its ability to generate potential future patient trajectories. However, while this generative capability is highly valuable for supporting clinical decision-making, it introduces the dual challenges of error accumulation [ 10 ] and clinical plausibility [ 11 ]. Because these autoregressive models predict future states sequentially, an erroneous prediction generated in the middle of the event stream becomes the conditioning context for all subsequent steps. This phenomenon causes errors to cascade exponentially, leading to generated trajectories that rapidly diverge from realistic patient outcomes over longer time horizons [ 10 ]. Furthermore, deep learning models operate primarily as statistical pattern matchers and lack an inherent understanding of physiological rules, biological limits, or strict clinical workflows [ 120 , 122 ]. Without explicit constraints, a model might generate a sequence that violates physical reality or medical logic. For example, the model may generate a negative blood pressure reading, predict a hospital discharge event prior to an admission, or suggest a pregnancy test for a male patient. While some approaches attempt to mitigate this through post-hoc filtering, integrating hard physiological constraints and deterministic clinical rules directly into the generative modelling process is essential to ensure that predicted trajectories remain physically viable and clinically safe [120]. 

The Absence of Standardised Benchmarking Despite the rapid proliferation of EHR event stream architectures, the field is currently hindered by a distinct lack of standardised benchmark-ing protocols [ 14 ]. As evidenced by the evaluation strategies summarised in Appendix Table 2, the existing literature employs a highly fragmented array of performance metrics. For identical 111:16 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu 

downstream tasks, such as risk prediction or multi-label diagnosis, studies frequently diverge in their choice of evaluation metrics, alternating between the area under the receiver operating char-acteristic curve (AUC), area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC), F1-score, and Mean Average Precision (MAP). Furthermore, while public datasets like MIMIC-III [ 48 ] and MIMIC-IV [ 47 ] are commonly utilised, a significant proportion of research relies on private, institutional cohorts. This dependence on private data, compounded by inconsistent metric selection, creates a disjointed evaluation landscape that precludes direct, equitable comparisons between models. Consequently, it is often impossible to determine whether a model’s reported superiority stems from genuine algorithmic innovation, specific data preprocessing choices, or favourable metric selection [ 9]. To mature, the field urgently requires a unified, open-source benchmark comprising standardised clinical datasets, consistent event stream curation pipelines, and fixed evaluation metrics tailored to specific clinical scenarios to rigorously assess the true efficacy of these models. 

8 Future Directions 8.1 Multimodal Event Streams 

Although current research largely treats structured data and unstructured notes as separate inputs fused at a late stage, the event stream representation offers a unique opportunity to unify these modalities into a single, chronologically consistent timeline. Future work should move beyond simple concatenation and instead treat complex data types, including clinical narratives, images, and bio-signals, as distinct clinical events (𝑡, 𝑐, 𝑣 ) within the stream. The primary challenge and opportunity lie in feature alignment: mapping high-frequency continuous signals (e.g., biosensors) and sparse, information-dense events (e.g., MRI scans) into the same discrete event sequence 

𝑋 = {𝑋 𝑞 }. Explicitly modelling these modalities as interleaved events allows the model to capture the causal interplay between different data types, for example, how a sudden drop in a biosensor reading ( 𝑡 𝑖 ) triggers a specific imaging order ( 𝑡 𝑖 +1) and a subsequent diagnosis code ( 𝑡 𝑖 +2) [ 82 ]. Approaches that use unified set embeddings or bottleneck tokens to exchange information between modality-specific encoders at each timestep are particularly promising [ 62 ]. Furthermore, methods that align embeddings from disparate sources can resolve the ambiguity of sparse structured records, providing a denser, more context-rich trajectory for downstream tasks [ 26 , 37 , 66 , 69 , 79 , 109 , 143 ]. 

8.2 Large Event Models 

The sequential nature of EHR event streams makes them the ideal substrate for developing large event stream models (LEMs), the foundation models pre-trained specifically for clinical events [ 35 ]. Unlike tabular models, event stream architectures can leverage next-event prediction objectives (predicting the time 𝑡 𝑛 +1, type 𝑐 𝑛 +1, and value 𝑣 𝑛 +1) to learn the intrinsic temporal dynamics of disease progression. The future evolution in this domain is likely to follow two primary trajectories. The first is semantic integration, where models leverage LLMs to ground abstract clinical codes in natural language. By translating structured event tuples (𝑡, 𝑐, 𝑣 ) into textual descriptions, these systems can process the patient’s history as a coherent narrative [ 82 ]. This capability enables the interpretation of rare codes through their definitions and facilitates the generation of transparent, natural language explanations for model predictions [ 1, 81 , 150 ]. The second frontier is generative trajectory modelling, which shifts the application from risk prediction to trajectory simulation. This direction focuses on learning the complex probability distributions of event sequences to construct a "digital twin" of the patient, which is plausible future timelines given the current patient’s health status [ 58 , 142 ]. By simulating how a patient’s path evolves, these generative models enable robust counterfactual analysis. For instance, clinicians can simulate "what-if" scenarios to observe how a trajectory might diverge under different treatment protocols. Furthermore, this generative capacity The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:17 

facilitates the creation of high-fidelity synthetic data, supporting research and decision-making while rigorously preserving patient privacy [145, 166]. 

8.3 Reinforcement Learning for Optimisation 

Although the current landscape of EHR event stream modelling is predominantly focused on predictive tasks and trajectory generation [ 3 ], a critical future frontier lies in optimisation via reinforcement learning (RL). The chronological sequence of clinical events and interventions of event streams maps naturally onto the Markov decision process [ 167 ]. This natural alignment renders the event stream representation an ideal substrate for offline RL algorithms to optimise the prediction and generation capabilities of the event stream models. One promising direction is utilising the robust, time-aware embeddings generated by self-supervised event models as the continuous state space for RL agents [ 125 ]. Rather than merely forecasting future events, these agents could recommend optimal sequences of interventions to maximise long-term patient health outcomes while minimising adverse events. In addition, RL techniques can be integrated into the generative modelling process itself to optimise the overall quality and clinical plausibility of the predicted patient trajectories [ 139 ]. By formulating appropriate reward functions, models can be explicitly penalised for generating physically impossible events or violating established medical workflows, while receiving high rewards for producing coherent, biologically viable sequences. 

9 Conclusion 

This review establishes a unified framework for EHR event stream modelling by categorising methods based on their handling of time, type, and value. A significant trend identified is the methodological shift from task-specific supervised training to self-supervised learning that leverages longitudinal unlabelled data to learn robust representations. Applications across critical care, ED, hospital/secondary care, and primary care demonstrate the versatility of event stream models in supporting tasks such as diagnosis prediction, risk prediction, and trajectory generation. However, the field still faces significant challenges, particularly in handling co-occurring events, managing long temporal contexts, dealing with the cold-start problem, addressing the challenges of error accumulation and clinical plausibility, and the absence of standardised benchmarking. Looking forward, future research can leverage the event stream as a unified multimodal representation to integrate structured and unstructured data, develop the generative large-event models for patient trajectory simulation, and optimise the event stream models with RL. This evolution positions the EHR event stream as a foundation for the next generation of personalised clinical decision support. 

References            

> [1] Agarwal, C., Tanneru, S. H., and Lakkaraju, H. (2024). Faithfulness vs. plausibility: On the (un) reliability of explanations from large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04614 .[2] Amirahmadi, A., Etminani, F., Björk, J., Melander, O., and Ohlsson, M. (2025). Trajectory-ordered objectives for self-supervised representation learning of temporal healthcare data using transformers: Model development and evaluation study. JMIR Medical Informatics , 13(1):e68138. [3] Amirahmadi, A., Ohlsson, M., and Etminani, K. (2023). Deep learning prediction models based on ehr trajectories: A systematic review. Journal of biomedical informatics , 144:104430. [4] Antikainen, E., Linnosmaa, J., Umer, A., Oksala, N., Eskola, M., van Gils, M., Hernesniemi, J., and Gabbouj, M. (2023). Transformers for cardiac patient mortality risk prediction from heterogeneous electronic health records. Scientific Reports ,13(1):3517. [5] Arnrich, B., Choi, E., Fries, J. A., McDermott, M. B., Oh, J., Pollard, T., Shah, N., Steinberg, E., Wornow, M., and van de Water, R. (2024). Medical event data standard (meds): Facilitating machine learning for health. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Learning from Time Series For Health , pages 03–08. [6] Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. (2014). Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 .

111:18 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu 

[7] Bai, T., Zhang, S., Egleston, B. L., and Vucetic, S. (2018). Interpretable representation learning for healthcare via capturing disease progression through time. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining , pages 43–51. [8] Barren, M. and Hauskrecht, M. (2021). Improving prediction of low-prior clinical events with simultaneous general patient-state representation learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Medicine , pages 479–490. Springer. [9] Beam, A. L., Manrai, A. K., and Ghassemi, M. (2020). Challenges to the reproducibility of machine learning models in health care. Jama , 323(4):305–306. [10] Bengio, S., Vinyals, O., Jaitly, N., and Shazeer, N. (2015). Scheduled sampling for sequence prediction with recurrent neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 28. [11] Biswal, S., Ghosh, S., Duke, J., Malin, B., Stewart, W., Xiao, C., and Sun, J. (2021). Eva: Generating longitudinal electronic health records using conditional variational autoencoders. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference , pages 260–282. PMLR. [12] Blanco-Donoso, L. M., Amutio, A., Moreno-Jiménez, B., del Carmen Yeo-Ayala, M., Hermosilla, D., and Garrosa, E. (2019). Incivility at work, upset at home? testing the cross-level moderation effect of emotional dysregulation among female nurses from primary health care. Scandinavian journal of psychology , 60(3):267–276. [13] Chen, J., Yin, C., Wang, Y., and Zhang, P. (2024). Predictive modeling with temporal graphical representation on electronic health records. In IJCAI: proceedings of the conference , volume 2024, page 5763. [14] Chen, T., Zhu, M., Luo, Z., and Zhu, T. (2026). Cross-representation benchmarking in time-series electronic health records for clinical outcome prediction. In 2026 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 1–5. IEEE. [15] Chen, Z., Li, P., Dong, X., and Hong, P. (2025). Uncertainty quantification for clinical outcome predictions with (large) language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 7512–7523. [16] Cheng, Y., Wang, F., Zhang, P., and Hu, J. (2016). Risk prediction with electronic health records: A deep learning approach. In Proceedings of the 2016 SIAM international conference on data mining , pages 432–440. SIAM. [17] Cho, M., Song, M., Park, J., Yeom, S.-R., Wang, I.-J., and Choi, B.-K. (2020). Process mining-supported emergency room process performance indicators. International journal of environmental research and public health , 17(17):6290. [18] Choi, E., Schuetz, A., Stewart, W. F., and Sun, J. (2017). Using recurrent neural network models for early detection of heart failure onset. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 24(2):361–370. [19] Chowdhury, S., Chen, Y., Li, P., Rajaganapathy, S., Wen, A., Ma, X., Dai, Q., Yu, Y., Fu, S., Jiang, X., et al. (2024). Stratifying heart failure patients with graph neural network and transformer using electronic health records to optimize drug response prediction. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 31(8):1671–1681. [20] Coombes, C. E., Coombes, K. R., and Fareed, N. (2022). Sequences of events from the electronic medical record and the onset of infection. Chemistry & Biodiversity , 19(11):e202200657. [21] Dai, S., Gao, A., Li, Z., and Du, Y. (2025). Rotary position embedding-based transformer hawkes process for event-type big data. Big Data Mining and Analytics , 9(1):23–38. [22] Dao, C.-T., Phan, N. M. T., Ding, J.-E., Wu, C., Restrepo, D., Luo, D., Zhao, F., Liao, C.-C., Peng, W.-C., Wang, C.-T., et al. (2025). Curenet: combining unified representations for efficient chronic disease prediction. Health Information Science and Systems , 14(1):7. [23] De Barros, P. H. and Rodrigues, J. F. (2022). Attentionhcare: Advances on computer-aided medical prognosis using attention-based neural networks. In 2022 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pages 1–8. IEEE. [24] Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. (2019). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers) , pages 4171–4186. [25] Diggle, P. J., Fiksel, T., Grabarnik, P., Ogata, Y., Stoyan, D., and Tanemura, M. (1994). On parameter estimation for pairwise interaction point processes. International Statistical Review/Revue Internationale de Statistique , pages 99–117. [26] Ding, S., Ye, J., Hu, X., and Zou, N. (2024). Distilling the knowledge from large-language model for health event prediction. Scientific Reports , 14(1):30675. [27] Dong, X., Deng, J., Rashidian, S., Abell-Hart, K., Hou, W., Rosenthal, R. N., Saltz, M., Saltz, J. H., and Wang, F. (2021). Identifying risk of opioid use disorder for patients taking opioid medications with deep learning. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 28(8):1683–1693. [28] Dong, X., Rashidian, S., Wang, Y., Hajagos, J., Zhao, X., Rosenthal, R. N., Kong, J., Saltz, M., Saltz, J., and Wang, F. (2020). Machine learning based opioid overdose prediction using electronic health records. In AMIA annual symposium proceedings , volume 2019, page 389. [29] Draxler, F., Meng, Y., Nelson, K., Laskowski, L., Yang, Y., Karaletsos, T., and Mandt, S. (2025). Transformers for mixed-type event sequences. In Proceedings of the 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:19 

[30] Fu, T., Gao, T., Xiao, C., Ma, T., and Sun, J. (2019). Pearl: Prototype learning via rule learning. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM international conference on bioinformatics, computational biology and health informatics , pages 223–232. [31] Funkner, A. A., Yakovlev, A. N., and Kovalchuk, S. V. (2017). Data-driven modeling of clinical pathways using electronic health records. Procedia computer science , 121:835–842. [32] Gao, F., Chen, Y., and Liu, M. (2023). Prescription recommendation based on intention retrieval network and multimodal medical indicator. In Proceedings of the 1st international workshop on deep multimodal learning for information retrieval ,pages 19–27. [33] Gao, T., Subramanian, D., Bhattacharjya, D., Shou, X., Mattei, N., and Bennett, K. P. (2021). Causal inference for event pairs in multivariate point processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:17311–17324. [34] Ghanzouri, I., Amal, S., Ho, V., Safarnejad, L., Cabot, J., Brown-Johnson, C., Leeper, N., Asch, S., Shah, N., and Ross, E. (2022). Performance and usability testing of an automated tool for detection of peripheral artery disease using electronic health records. Scientific reports , 12(1):13364. [35] Guo, L. L., Fries, J., Steinberg, E., Fleming, S. L., Morse, K., Aftandilian, C., Posada, J., Shah, N., and Sung, L. (2024). A multi-center study on the adaptability of a shared foundation model for electronic health records. NPJ digital medicine ,7(1):171. [36] Hansen, E. R., Nielsen, T. D., Mulvad, T., Strausholm, M. N., Sagi, T., and Hose, K. (2023). Patient event sequences for predicting hospitalization length of stay. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Medicine , pages 51–56. Springer. [37] He, Y., Wang, C., Li, N., and Zeng, Z. (2020). Attention and memory-augmented networks for dual-view sequential learning. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , pages 125–134. [38] Henriksson, A., Zhao, J., Dalianis, H., and Boström, H. (2016). Ensembles of randomized trees using diverse distributed representations of clinical events. BMC medical informatics and decision making , 16(Suppl 2):69. [39] Hettige, B., Wang, W., Li, Y.-F., Le, S., and Buntine, W. (2020). Medgraph: structural and temporal representation learning of electronic medical records. In ECAI 2020 , pages 1810–1817. IOS Press. [40] Heyman, E. T., Ashfaq, A., Ekelund, U., Ohlsson, M., Björk, J., Khoshnood, A. M., and Lingman, M. (2024). A novel interpretable deep learning model for diagnosis in emergency department dyspnoea patients based on complete data from an entire health care system. Plos one , 19(12):e0311081. [41] Hong, C., Chen, J., Yi, F., Hao, Y., Meng, F., Dong, Z., Lin, H., and Huang, Z. (2022). Cd-surv: a contrastive-based model for dynamic survival analysis. Health Information Science and Systems , 10(1):5. [42] Hu, H., Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Chen, Q., and Guan, Q. (2024). A comprehensive survey on contrastive learning. 

Neurocomputing , 610:128645. [43] Huang, K., Altosaar, J., and Ranganath, R. (2019a). Clinicalbert: Modeling clinical notes and predicting hospital readmission. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05342 .[44] Huang, Y., Yang, X., and Xu, C. (2019b). Time-guided high-order attention model of longitudinal heterogeneous healthcare data. In Pacific Rim International Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 57–70. Springer. [45] Hur, C., Wi, J., and Kim, Y. (2020). Facilitating the development of deep learning models with visual analytics for electronic health records. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health , 17(22):8303. [46] Jiang, H. and Yang, D. (2020). Learning graph-based embedding from ehrs for time-aware patient similarity. Engineering Letters , 28(4). [47] Johnson, A. E., Bulgarelli, L., Shen, L., Gayles, A., Shammout, A., Horng, S., Pollard, T. J., Hao, S., Moody, B., Gow, B., et al. (2023). Mimic-iv, a freely accessible electronic health record dataset. Scientific data , 10(1):1. [48] Johnson, A. E., Pollard, T. J., Shen, L., Lehman, L.-w. H., Feng, M., Ghassemi, M., Moody, B., Szolovits, P., Anthony Celi, L., and Mark, R. G. (2016). Mimic-iii, a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data , 3(1):1–9. [49] Jurewicz, M. and Derczynski, L. (2021). Set-to-sequence methods in machine learning: A review. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 71:885–924. [50] Kalia, S. (2024). Causal inference using electronic health records in primary care . PhD thesis, University of Toronto (Canada). [51] Kamruzzaman, M., Heavey, J., Song, A., Bielskas, M., Bhattacharya, P., Madden, G., Klein, E., Deng, X., Vullikanti, A., et al. (2024). Improving risk prediction of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus using machine learning methods with network features: Retrospective development study. JMIR AI , 3(1):e48067. [52] Kanchinadam, T. and Shaheen, G. (2024). Large language models encode the practice of medicine. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 6: Industry Track) , pages 427–436. [53] Karami, H., Atienza, D., and Ionescu, A. (2024). Tee4ehr: Transformer event encoder for better representation learning in electronic health records. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine , 154:102903. 111:20 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu 

[54] Karami, H., Ionescu, A., and Atienza, D. (2023). Point-process-based representation learning for electronic health records. In 2023 IEEE EMBS International Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI) , pages 1–4. IEEE. [55] Kauffman, J., Holmes, E., Vaid, A., Charney, A. W., Kovatch, P., Lampert, J., Sakhuja, A., Zitnik, M., Glicksberg, B. S., Hofer, I., et al. (2025). Infehr: Clinical phenotype resolution through deep geometric learning on electronic health records. 

Nature Communications , 16(1):8475. [56] Kazijevs, M. and Samad, M. D. (2023). Deep imputation of missing values in time series health data: A review with benchmarking. Journal of biomedical informatics , 144:104440. [57] Kovtun, E., Boeva, G., Shulga, A., and Zaytsev, A. (2024). Label attention network for temporal sets prediction: You were looking at a wrong self-attention. In ECAI 2024 , pages 4772–4779. IOS Press. [58] Kuruppu Appuhamilage, G. D. K., Hussain, M., Zaman, M., and Ali Khan, W. (2025). A health digital twin framework for discrete event simulation based optimised critical care workflows. npj Digital Medicine , 8(1):376. [59] Kwak, H., Chang, J., Choe, B., Park, S., and Jung, K. (2021). Interpretable disease prediction using heterogeneous patient records with self-attentive fusion encoder. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 28(10):2155–2164. [60] Lauritsen, S. M., Kalør, M. E., Kongsgaard, E. L., Lauritsen, K. M., Jørgensen, M. J., Lange, J., and Thiesson, B. (2020). Early detection of sepsis utilizing deep learning on electronic health record event sequences. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine , 104:101820. [61] Lee, J. M. and Hauskrecht, M. (2020). Multi-scale temporal memory for clinical event time-series prediction. In 

International conference on artificial intelligence in medicine , pages 313–324. Springer. [62] Lee, K., Lee, S., Hahn, S., Hyun, H., Choi, E., Ahn, B., and Lee, J. (2023). Learning missing modal electronic health records with unified multi-modal data embedding and modality-aware attention. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference , pages 423–442. PMLR. [63] Lee, S. A., Jain, S., Chen, A., Ono, K., Biswas, A., Rudas, Á., Fang, J., and Chiang, J. N. (2025). Clinical decision support using pseudo-notes from multiple streams of ehr data. npj Digital Medicine , 8(1):394. [64] Li, R., Yin, C., Yang, S., Qian, B., and Zhang, P. (2020). Marrying medical domain knowledge with deep learning on electronic health records: a deep visual analytics approach. Journal of medical Internet research , 22(9):e20645. [65] Li, W., Min, X., Ye, P., Xie, W., and Zhao, D. (2024). Temporal topic model for clinical pathway mining from electronic medical records. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making , 24(1):20. [66] Li, W., Yang, J., and Min, X. (2022a). Next-day medical activities recommendation model with double attention mechanism using generative adversarial network. Journal of Healthcare Engineering , 2022(1):6334435. [67] Li, Y., Mamouei, M., Salimi-Khorshidi, G., Rao, S., Hassaine, A., Canoy, D., Lukasiewicz, T., and Rahimi, K. (2022b). Hi-behrt: hierarchical transformer-based model for accurate prediction of clinical events using multimodal longitudinal electronic health records. IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics , 27(2):1106–1117. [68] Li, Z., Li, R., Zhou, Y., Rasmy, L., Zhi, D., Zhu, P., Dono, A., Jiang, X., Xu, H., Esquenazi, Y., et al. (2023). Prediction of brain metastases development in patients with lung cancer by explainable artificial intelligence from electronic health records. JCO clinical cancer informatics , 7:e2200141. [69] Lin, S., Wang, M., Shi, C., Xu, Z., Chen, L., Gao, Q., and Chen, J. (2022). Mr-kpa: medication recommendation by combining knowledge-enhanced pre-training with a deep adversarial network. BMC bioinformatics , 23(1):552. [70] Lin, Z. and Yang, D. (2020). Medical concept embedding with variable temporal scopes for patient similarity. Engineering Letters , 28(3). [71] Liu, L., Li, H., Hu, Z., Shi, H., Wang, Z., Tang, J., and Zhang, M. (2020). Learning hierarchical representations of electronic health records for clinical outcome prediction. In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings , volume 2019, page 597. [72] Liu, L., Liu, Z., Wu, H., Wang, Z., Shen, J., Song, Y., and Zhang, M. (2021). Multi-task learning via adaptation to similar tasks for mortality prediction of diverse rare diseases. In Amia annual symposium proceedings , volume 2020, page 763. [73] Liu, L., Shen, J., Zhang, M., Wang, Z., and Tang, J. (2018). Learning the joint representation of heterogeneous temporal events for clinical endpoint prediction. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32. [74] Liu, Y., Qin, S., Yepes, A. J., Shao, W., Zhang, Z., and Salim, F. D. (2022a). Integrated convolutional and recurrent neural networks for health risk prediction using patient journey data with many missing values. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM) , pages 1658–1663. IEEE. [75] Liu, Y., Zhang, Z., Yepes, A. J., and Salim, F. D. (2022b). Modeling long-term dependencies and short-term correlations in patient journey data with temporal attention networks for health prediction. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM international conference on bioinformatics, computational biology and health informatics , pages 1–10. [76] Ljubic, B., Hai, A. A., Stanojevic, M., Diaz, W., Polimac, D., Pavlovski, M., and Obradovic, Z. (2020). Predicting complications of diabetes mellitus using advanced machine learning algorithms. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 27(9):1343–1351. [77] Lu, C., Reddy, C. K., Wang, P., Nie, D., and Ning, Y. (2023). Multi-label clinical time-series generation via conditional gan. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 36(4):1728–1740. The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:21 

[78] Lu, W., Ma, L., Chen, H., Jiang, X., and Gong, M. (2020). A clinical prediction model in health time series data based on long short-term memory network optimized by fruit fly optimization algorithm. IEEE Access , 8:136014–136023. [79] Lu, Y., Niu, K., Peng, X., Zeng, J., and Pei, S. (2022). Multi-modal intermediate fusion model for diagnosis prediction. In Proceedings of the 2022 6th International Conference on Innovation in Artificial Intelligence , pages 38–43. [80] Ma, M. D., Wang, X., Xiao, Y., Cuturrufo, A., Nori, V. S., Halperin, E., and Wang, W. (2025). Memorize and rank: Elevating large language models for clinical diagnosis prediction. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 24786–24794. [81] Ma, M. D., Xiao, Y., Cuturrufo, A., Wang, X., and Wang, W. (2024). Memorize and rank: Enabling large language models for medical event prediction. In AAAI 2024 Spring Symposium on Clinical Foundation Models .[82] McDermott, M., Nestor, B., Argaw, P., and Kohane, I. S. (2023). Event stream gpt: a data pre-processing and modeling library for generative, pre-trained transformers over continuous-time sequences of complex events. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:24322–24334. [83] Mei, T., Zheng, Z., Gao, Z., Wang, Q., Cheng, X., and Yang, W. (2024). Collaborative hypergraph networks for enhanced disease risk assessment. In 2024 International Conference on Electronics and Devices, Computational Science (ICEDCS) , pages 416–420. IEEE. [84] Men, L., Ilk, N., Tang, X., and Liu, Y. (2021). Multi-disease prediction using lstm recurrent neural networks. Expert Systems with Applications , 177:114905. [85] Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013). Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 .[86] Min, X., Yu, B., and Wang, F. (2019). Predictive modeling of the hospital readmission risk from patients’ claims data using machine learning: a case study on copd. Scientific reports , 9(1):2362. [87] Nagamine, T., Gillette, B., Kahoun, J., Burghaus, R., Lippert, J., and Saxena, M. (2022). Data-driven identification of heart failure disease states and progression pathways using electronic health records. Scientific reports , 12(1):17871. [88] Nigo, M., Rasmy, L., Mao, B., Kannadath, B. S., Xie, Z., and Zhi, D. (2024). Deep learning model for personalized prediction of positive mrsa culture using time-series electronic health records. Nature communications , 15(1):2036. [89] Niu, H., Omitaomu, O. A., Langston, M. A., Olama, M., Ozmen, O., Klasky, H. B., Laurio, A., Ward, M., and Nebeker, J. (2024). Ehr-bert: A bert-based model for effective anomaly detection in electronic health records. Journal of Biomedical Informatics , 150:104605. [90] Oufattole, N., Jeong, H., Mcdermott, M., Balagopalan, A., Jangeesingh, B., Ghassemi, M., and Stultz, C. (2024). Event-based contrastive learning for medical time series. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference . PMLR. [91] Pang, C., Jiang, X., Kalluri, K. S., Spotnitz, M., Chen, R., Perotte, A., and Natarajan, K. (2021). Cehr-bert: Incorporating temporal information from structured ehr data to improve prediction tasks. In Machine Learning for Health , pages 239–260. PMLR. [92] Peng, X., Long, G., Shen, T., Wang, S., and Jiang, J. (2020). Self-attention enhanced patient journey understanding in healthcare system. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases , pages 719–735. Springer. [93] Placido, D., Yuan, B., Hjaltelin, J. X., Zheng, C., Haue, A. D., Chmura, P. J., Yuan, C., Kim, J., Umeton, R., Antell, G., et al. (2023). A deep learning algorithm to predict risk of pancreatic cancer from disease trajectories. Nature medicine ,29(5):1113–1122. [94] Post, B., Klapaukh, R., Brett, S. J., and Faisal, A. A. (2025). Harnessing temporal patterns in administrative patient data to predict risk of emergency hospital admission. The Lancet Digital Health , 7(2):e124–e135. [95] Pradhan, P., Anto, O. B., Pal, S., Gaur, M., KV, C., and Ansari, M. Y. M. (2025). Enhancing clinical code mapping with fine-tuned contextual embeddings. In 2025 3rd International Conference on Data Science and Information System (ICDSIS) ,pages 1–6. IEEE. [96] Qiao, Z., Zhao, S., Xiao, C., Li, X., Qin, Y., and Wang, F. (2018). Pairwise-ranking based collaborative recurrent neural networks for clinical event prediction. In Proceedings of the twenty-seventh international joint conference on artificial intelligence .[97] Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., Sutskever, I., et al. (2019). Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9. [98] Rajkomar, A., Oren, E., Chen, K., Dai, A. M., Hajaj, N., Hardt, M., Liu, P. J., Liu, X., Marcus, J., Sun, M., et al. (2018). Scalable and accurate deep learning with electronic health records. NPJ digital medicine , 1(1):18. [99] Ramirez-Alcocer, U. M., Tello-Leal, E., Romero, G., and Macías-Hernández, B. A. (2023). A deep learning approach for predictive healthcare process monitoring. Information , 14(9):508. [100] Rasmy, L., Xiang, Y., Xie, Z., Tao, C., and Zhi, D. (2021). Med-bert: pretrained contextualized embeddings on large-scale structured electronic health records for disease prediction. NPJ digital medicine , 4(1):86. [101] Renc, P., Grzeszczyk, M. K., Oufattole, N., Goode, D., Jia, Y., Bieganski, S., McDermott, M. B., Was, J., Samir, A. E., Cunningham, J. W., et al. (2025). Foundation model of electronic medical records for adaptive risk estimation. GigaScience ,111:22 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu 

14:giaf107. [102] Renc, P., Jia, Y., Samir, A. E., Was, J., Li, Q., Bates, D. W., and Sitek, A. (2024). Zero shot health trajectory prediction using transformer. NPJ digital medicine , 7(1):256. [103] Rethmeier, N., Serbetci, N. O., Möller, S., and Roller, R. (2021). Efficare: better prognostic models via resource-efficient health embeddings. In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings , volume 2020, page 1060. [104] Rough, K., Dai, A. M., Zhang, K., Xue, Y., Vardoulakis, L. M., Cui, C., Butte, A. J., Howell, M. D., and Rajkomar, A. (2020). Predicting inpatient medication orders from electronic health record data. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics ,108(1):145–154. [105] Ru, Y., Qiu, X., Tan, X., Chen, B., Gao, Y., and Jin, Y. (2022). Sparse-attentive meta temporal point process for clinical decision support. Neurocomputing , 485:114–123. [106] Ruan, T., Lei, L., Zhou, Y., Zhai, J., Zhang, L., He, P., and Gao, J. (2019). Representation learning for clinical time series prediction tasks in electronic health records. BMC medical informatics and decision making , 19(Suppl 8):259. [107] Rudrapatna, V. A., Ravindranath, V. G., Arneson, D. V., Mosenia, A., Butte, A. J., and Wang, S. (2025). From trial data to personalized medicine: a validated framework with an application to crohn’s disease. npj Digital Medicine , 8(1):327. [108] Schuster, M. and Paliwal, K. K. (1997). Bidirectional recurrent neural networks. IEEE transactions on Signal Processing ,45(11):2673–2681. [109] Seinen, T. M., Kors, J. A., van Mulligen, E. M., and Rijnbeek, P. R. (2025). Using structured codes and free-text notes to measure information complementarity in electronic health records: Feasibility and validation study. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 27:e66910. [110] Sengupta, S., Loomba, J., Sharma, S., Brown, D. E., Thorpe, L., Haendel, M. A., Chute, C. G., and Hong, S. (2022). Analyzing historical diagnosis code data from nih n3c and recover programs using deep learning to determine risk factors for long covid. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM) , pages 2797–2802. IEEE. [111] Shahidi, F., Macdonald, M. E., Seitz, D., Barry, R., and Messier, G. (2024). Exploring the preprocessing of a time-series administrative healthcare dataset on deep learning to improve prediction. Authorea Preprints .[112] Shchur, O., Türkmen, A. C., Januschowski, T., and Günnemann, S. (2021). Neural temporal point processes: A review. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , page 4585–4593, Montreal, Canada. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. [113] Sheng, J. Q., Xu, D., Hu, P. J.-H., Li, L., and Huang, T.-S. (2024). Mining multimorbidity trajectories and co-medication effects from patient data to predict post-hip fracture outcomes. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems ,15(2):1–24. [114] Shestov, A., Zoloev, O., Makarenko, M., Orlov, M., Fadeev, E., Kireev, I., and Savchenko, A. (2025). Llm4es: Learning user embeddings from event sequences via large language models. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , pages 5238–5242. [115] Shi, L. (2012). The impact of primary care: a focused review. Scientifica , 2012(1):432892. [116] Shickel, B., Silva, B., Ozrazgat-Baslanti, T., Ren, Y., Khezeli, K., Guan, Z., Tighe, P. J., Bihorac, A., and Rashidi, P. (2022). Multi-dimensional patient acuity estimation with longitudinal ehr tokenization and flexible transformer networks. 

Frontiers in Digital Health , 4:1029191. [117] Shime, N. (2021). The right care at the right place: Significance of intensive care units for critically ill patients. The Lancet Regional Health–Western Pacific , 13. [118] Shin, H. A., Kang, H., and Choi, M. (2025). Triage data-driven prediction models for hospital admission of emergency department patients: A systematic review. Healthcare Informatics Research , 31(1):23–36. [119] Shou, X., Gao, T., Subramanian, D., Bhattacharjya, D., and Bennett, K. P. (2023). Concurrent multi-label prediction in event streams. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 9820–9828. [120] Sirocchi, C., Bogliolo, A., and Montagna, S. (2024). Medical-informed machine learning: integrating prior knowledge into medical decision systems. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making , 24(Suppl 4):186. [121] Sofiia, V., Ilya, D., Levon, A., and Aleksandra, V. (2024). Graph-based data representation and prediction in medical domain tasks using graph neural networks. In International Conference on Computational Science , pages 371–378. Springer. [122] Song, W., Hou, Z., Gu, W., Afgan, M. S., Cui, J., Wang, H., Wang, Y., and Wang, Z. (2022). Incorporating domain knowledge into machine learning for laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy quantification. Spectrochimica Acta Part B: Atomic Spectroscopy , 195:106490. [123] Song, Z., Lu, Q., Zhu, H., Buckeridge, D., and Li, Y. (2025). Trajgpt: Irregular time-series representation learning of health trajectory. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics .[124] Song, Z.-y. and Liu, J.-w. (2022). Tri-transformer hawkes process via dot-product attention operations with event type and temporal encoding. Computational Intelligence , 38(2):690–712. [125] Steinberg, E., Fries, J. A., Xu, Y., and Shah, N. (2024). Motor: A time-to-event foundation model for structured medical records. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:23 

[126] Su, J., Ahmed, M., Lu, Y., Pan, S., Bo, W., and Liu, Y. (2024). Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing , 568:127063. [127] Suo, Q., Ma, F., Canino, G., Gao, J., Zhang, A., Veltri, P., and Agostino, G. (2018). A multi-task framework for monitoring health conditions via attention-based recurrent neural networks. In AMIA annual symposium proceedings , volume 2017, page 1665. [128] Tan, Y., Yang, C., Wei, X., Chen, C., Liu, W., Li, L., Zhou, J., and Zheng, X. (2022). Metacare++: Meta-learning with hierarchical subtyping for cold-start diagnosis prediction in healthcare data. In Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 449–459. [129] Tariq, A., Kaur, G., Su, L., Gichoya, J., Patel, B., and Banerjee, I. (2025). Adaptable graph neural networks design to support generalizability for clinical event prediction. Journal of biomedical informatics , 163:104794. [130] Thakur, A., Agasthi, P., Chao, C.-J., Farina, J. M., Holmes, D. R., Fortuin, D., Ayoub, C., Arsanjani, R., and Banerjee, I. (2025). Joint fusion of ehr and ecg data using attention-based cnn and vit for predicting adverse clinical endpoints in percutaneous coronary intervention patients. Computers in Biology and Medicine , 189:109966. [131] Theodorou, B., Danek, B., Tummala, V., Kumar, S. P., Malin, B., and Sun, J. (2025). Improving medical machine learning models with generative balancing for equity and excellence. npj Digital Medicine , 8(1):100. [132] Tomašev, N., Glorot, X., Rae, J. W., Zielinski, M., Askham, H., Saraiva, A., Mottram, A., Meyer, C., Ravuri, S., Protsyuk, I., et al. (2019). A clinically applicable approach to continuous prediction of future acute kidney injury. Nature , 572(7767):116– 119. [133] Tomašev, N., Harris, N., Baur, S., Mottram, A., Glorot, X., Rae, J. W., Zielinski, M., Askham, H., Saraiva, A., Magliulo, V., et al. (2021). Use of deep learning to develop continuous-risk models for adverse event prediction from electronic health records. Nature protocols , 16(6):2765–2787. [134] Vabalas, A., Hartonen, T., Vartiainen, P., Jukarainen, S., Viippola, E., Rodosthenous, R. S., Liu, A., Hägg, S., Perola, M., and Ganna, A. (2024). Deep learning-based prediction of one-year mortality in finland is an accurate but unfair aging marker. Nature Aging , 4(7):1014–1027. [135] van Dam, P. M., van Doorn, W. P., van Gils, F., Sevenich, L., Lambriks, L., Meex, S. J., Cals, J. W., and Stassen, P. M. (2024). Machine learning for risk stratification in the emergency department (mars-ed) study protocol for a randomized controlled pilot trial on the implementation of a prediction model based on machine learning technology predicting 31-day mortality in the emergency department. Scandinavian Journal of Trauma, Resuscitation and Emergency Medicine , 32(1):5. [136] van der Waal, W., van de Weerd, I., Beerepoot, I., Lu, X., Kappen, T., Haitjema, S., and Reijers, H. A. (2025). Putting the sword to the test: Finding workarounds with process mining. Business & Information Systems Engineering , 67(2):171–190. [137] van Os, H. J., Kanning, J. P., Wermer, M. J., Chavannes, N. H., Numans, M. E., Ruigrok, Y. M., van Zwet, E. W., Putter, H., Steyerberg, E. W., and Groenwold, R. H. (2022). Developing clinical prediction models using primary care electronic health record data: the impact of data preparation choices on model performance. Frontiers in Epidemiology , 2:871630. [138] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30. [139] Wang, C., Zhou, H., Hu, Y., Huo, Y., Li, B., Liu, T., Xiao, T., and Zhu, J. (2024a). Esrl: Efficient sampling-based reinforcement learning for sequence generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 19107–19115. [140] Wang, L., Wang, Q., Bai, H., Liu, C., Liu, W., Zhang, Y., Jiang, L., Xu, H., Wang, K., and Zhou, Y. (2020). Ehr2vec: representation learning of medical concepts from temporal patterns of clinical notes based on self-attention mechanism. 

Frontiers in Genetics , 11:630. [141] Wang, Y. (2025). Efficient adverse event forecasting in clinical trials via transformer-augmented survival analysis. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 International Symposium on Bioinformatics and Computational Biology , pages 92–97. [142] Wang, Y., Fu, T., Xu, Y., Ma, Z., Xu, H., Du, B., Lu, Y., Gao, H., Wu, J., and Chen, J. (2024b). Twin-gpt: digital twins for clinical trials via large language model. ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications .[143] Wang, Y., Yin, C., and Zhang, P. (2024c). Multimodal risk prediction with physiological signals, medical images and clinical notes. Heliyon , 10(5). [144] Wang, Z., Li, H., Liu, L., Wu, H., and Zhang, M. (2019). Predictive multi-level patient representations from electronic health records. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM) , pages 987–990. IEEE. [145] Wang, Z., Samsten, I., Kougia, V., and Papapetrou, P. (2023). Style-transfer counterfactual explanations: An application to mortality prevention of icu patients. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine , 135:102457. [146] Weerakody, P. B., Wong, K. W., Wang, G., and Ela, W. (2021). A review of irregular time series data handling with gated recurrent neural networks. Neurocomputing , 441:161–178. [147] Weiss, J. C. (2017). Piecewise-constant parametric approximations for survival learning. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference , pages 1–12. PMLR. [148] Wornow, M., Bedi, S., Hernandez, M. A. F., Steinberg, E., Fries, J. A., Re, C., Koyejo, S., and Shah, N. (2025). Context clues: Evaluating long context models for clinical prediction tasks on ehr data. In The Thirteenth International Conference 111:24 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu 

on Learning Representations .[149] Wu, S., Liu, S., Sohn, S., Moon, S., Wi, C.-i., Juhn, Y., and Liu, H. (2018). Modeling asynchronous event sequences with rnns. Journal of biomedical informatics , 83:167–177. [150] Wu, Z., Dadu, A., Nalls, M., Faghri, F., and Sun, J. (2024). Instruction tuning large language models to understand electronic health records. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:54772–54786. [151] Wu, Z., Yao, H., Liebovitz, D., and Sun, J. (2023). An iterative self-learning framework for medical domain generalization. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:54833–54854. [152] Xiang, Y., Ji, H., Zhou, Y., Li, F., Du, J., Rasmy, L., Wu, S., Zheng, W. J., Xu, H., Zhi, D., et al. (2020). Asthma exacerbation prediction and risk factor analysis based on a time-sensitive, attentive neural network: retrospective cohort study. Journal of medical Internet research , 22(7):e16981. [153] Xiang, Y., Xu, J., Si, Y., Li, Z., Rasmy, L., Zhou, Y., Tiryaki, F., Li, F., Zhang, Y., Wu, Y., et al. (2019). Time-sensitive clinical concept embeddings learned from large electronic health records. BMC medical informatics and decision making ,19(Suppl 2):58. [154] Xiao, T., Xu, Z., He, W., Xiao, Z., Zhang, Y., Liu, Z., Chen, S., Thai, M. T., Bian, J., Rashidi, P., et al. (2025). Xtsformer: Cross-temporal-scale transformer for irregular-time event prediction in clinical applications. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 28502–28510. [155] Xie, F., Yuan, H., Ning, Y., Ong, M. E. H., Feng, M., Hsu, W., Chakraborty, B., and Liu, N. (2022). Deep learning for temporal data representation in electronic health records: A systematic review of challenges and methodologies. Journal of biomedical informatics , 126:103980. [156] Xie, Y. and Wu, J. (2024). Hgthp: a novel hyperbolic geometric transformer hawkes process for event prediction. 

Applied Intelligence , 54(1):357–374. [157] Xu, X., Wang, Y., Jin, T., and Wang, J. (2018). Learning the representation of medical features for clinical pathway analysis. In International conference on database systems for advanced applications , pages 37–52. Springer. [158] Xu, Y., Xu, S., Ramprassad, M., Tumanov, A., and Zhang, C. (2023). Transehr: self-supervised transformer for clinical time series data. In Machine Learning for Health (ML4H) , pages 623–635. PMLR. [159] Yang, S., Varghese, P., Stephenson, E., Tu, K., and Gronsbell, J. (2023a). Machine learning approaches for electronic health records phenotyping: a methodical review. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 30(2):367–381. [160] Yang, W., Zheng, Z., Bo, S., Wu, Z., Zhang, B., and Yang, Y. (2024). Dynamic hypergraph-enhanced prediction of sequential medical visits. In 2024 IEEE 6th International Conference on Power, Intelligent Computing and Systems (ICPICS) ,pages 798–802. IEEE. [161] Yang, Z., Mitra, A., Liu, W., Berlowitz, D., and Yu, H. (2023b). Transformehr: transformer-based encoder-decoder generative model to enhance prediction of disease outcomes using electronic health records. Nature communications ,14(1):7857. [162] Yao, H.-R., Chang, D.-C., Frieder, O., Huang, W., and Lee, T.-S. (2019). Multiple graph kernel fusion prediction of drug prescription. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM International Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and Health Informatics , pages 103–112. [163] Yin, C., Fu, S., Yao, B., Pham, T.-H., Cao, W., Wang, D., Caterino, J., and Zhang, P. (2025). Sepsiscalc: Integrating clinical calculators into early sepsis prediction via dynamic temporal graph construction. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V. 1 , pages 2779–2790. [164] Yin, C., Zhao, R., Qian, B., Lv, X., and Zhang, P. (2019). Domain knowledge guided deep learning with electronic health records. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) , pages 738–747. IEEE. [165] Yin, F., Nie, H., Pu, X., Zheng, P., Zhu, Q., Ren, Y., and Deng, L. (2026). Dual ontology-enhanced clinical decision learning for first-admission mortality prediction. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics .[166] Yoon, J., Mizrahi, M., Ghalaty, N. F., Jarvinen, T., Ravi, A. S., Brune, P., Kong, F., Anderson, D., Lee, G., Meir, A., et al. (2023). Ehr-safe: generating high-fidelity and privacy-preserving synthetic electronic health records. NPJ digital medicine ,6(1):141. [167] Yu, C., Liu, J., Nemati, S., and Yin, G. (2021). Reinforcement learning in healthcare: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , 55(1):1–36. [168] Zhang, T., Chen, M., and Bui, A. A. (2020). Diagnostic prediction with sequence-of-sets representation learning for clinical events. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Medicine , pages 348–358. Springer. [169] Zhang, T., Chen, M., and Bui, A. A. (2022a). Adadiag: Adversarial domain adaptation of diagnostic prediction with clinical event sequences. Journal of biomedical informatics , 134:104168. [170] Zhang, X., Qian, B., Li, X., Wei, J., Zheng, Y., Song, L., and Zheng, Q. (2019). An interpretable fast model for predicting the risk of heart failure. In Proceedings of the 2019 SIAM international conference on data mining , pages 576–584. SIAM. [171] Zhang, Z., Yan, C., Lasko, T. A., Sun, J., and Malin, B. A. (2021). Synteg: a framework for temporal structured electronic health data simulation. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 28(3):596–604. The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:25 

[172] Zhang, Z., Yan, C., Zhang, X., Nyemba, S. L., and Malin, B. A. (2022b). Forecasting the future clinical events of a patient through contrastive learning. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 29(9):1584–1592. [173] Zhao, Y. and Engelhard, M. M. (2025). Balancing interpretability and flexibility in modeling diagnostic trajectories with an embedded neural hawkes process model. Proceedings of machine learning research , 298:https–proceedings. [174] Zhao, Z., Jing, Y., Feng, F., Wu, J., Gao, C., and He, X. (2024). Leave no patient behind: Enhancing medication recommendation for rare disease patients. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 533–542. [175] Zheng, Y., Bensahla, A., Bjelogrlic, M., Zaghir, J., Turbe, H., Bednarczyk, L., Gaudet-Blavignac, C., Ehrsam, J., Marchand-Maillet, S., and Lovis, C. (2025). A scoping review of self-supervised representation learning for clinical decision making using ehr categorical data. npj Digital Medicine , 8(1):362. [176] Zhou, Y., Shi, J., Stein, R., Liu, X., Baldassano, R. N., Forrest, C. B., Chen, Y., and Huang, J. (2023). Missing data matter: an empirical evaluation of the impacts of missing ehr data in comparative effectiveness research. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 30(7):1246–1256. [177] Zhu, F., Chen, S., Xu, Y., He, W., Yu, F., Zhang, X., and Cui, L. (2022). Temporal hypergraph for personalized clinical pathway recommendation. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM) , pages 718–725. IEEE. [178] Zhu, M., Liu, Y., Luo, Z., and Zhu, T. (2025a). Bridging data gaps of rare conditions in icu: A multi-disease adaptation approach for clinical prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06432 .[179] Zhu, M., Luo, Z., Liu, Y., and Zhu, T. (2025b). Medtpe: Compressing long ehr sequence for llm-based clinical prediction with token-pair encoding. In Proceedings of the 11th Mining and Learning from Time Series Workshop@ KDD , volume 2025. [180] Zólyomi, L., Wang, T., Ennadir, S., Smirnov, O., and Cao, L. (2025). Unified approaches in self-supervised event stream modeling: Progress and prospects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04899 .111:26 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu 

A Summary of EHR Event Stream Modelling 

Table 2. Summary of EHR event stream modelling methods with supervised learning. 

Reference Event Stream Modelling Training Strategy Applications 

Time Type & Value Supervised Self-Sup. Scenario Task Metric Dataset Reference Event Stream Modelling Training Strategy Applications 

Time Type & Value Supervised Self-Sup. Scenario Task Metric Dataset 

2016 Year: 

[16] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction AUC IBM Warehouse [38] Feature Type Only - Skip-gram Hospital Risk Prediction ACC, AUC Stockholm EPR 

2017 Year: 

[18] Feature Type Only ✓ - Primary Care Diagnosis AUC Sutter Palo Alto [147] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction LL MIMIC-III 

2018 Year: 

[149] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction PRE, REC, F1, AUC PhysioNet-2012 [7] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Diagnosis ACC, W-F1 Private Mixed Dataset [73] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC, AP MIMIC-III [127] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction ACC SOF BloodTest [157] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Patient Clustering, LoS NMI, R@N, AUPRC New Rural Co-op [96] Feature Type & Value ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction R@K, RMSE MIMIC-III 

2019 Year: 

[164] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC MIMIC-III [144] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC, AP MIMIC-III [30] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC MIMIC-III [162] Feature Type Only ✓ - Primary Care, ED, Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, ACC, F1 NHIRD [170] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC MIMIC-III [86] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction AUC Geisinger [132] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC VA EHR [44] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction ACC, AUPRC, AUC MIMIC-III Hospital PPMI [106] Feature Type Only - Next-tok Hospital Risk Prediction AUC Shuguang Hosp. [153] Feature Type Only - Skip-gram ED, Hospital, ICU Risk Prediction AUC Cerner Health Facts 

2020 Year: 

[64] Feature Type Only ✓ - Combined Risk Prediction AUC, SEN, SPE KnowLife [60] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, mAP, NB Private [78] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Diagnosis PRE, R@k, MAP@k, AUC MIMIC-III [37] Feature Multimodal ✓ -ICU Medication Rec, DRG JSC, M-F1, AUPRC, ACC MIMIC-III Hospital Chinese Hospital Non-clinical Tax Agency [71] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC MIMIC-III [45] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Diagnosis , Risk Prediction AUC, F1 MIMIC-III [140] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Medication Rec. ACC SLE Clinical Notes [104] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Medication Rec. R@K, AUC, AUPRC UCSF EHR [92] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Diagnosis, Risk Prediction AUPRC, P@k MIMIC-III [39] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, AP, F1 Proprietary [152] Feature Type Only ✓ - ED, Hospital, ICU Risk Prediction AUC Cerner Health Facts [17] Feature Type Only ✓ - ED Triage ACC, PRE, REC, F1 Korean Tertiary ER [76] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction ACC, SEN, SPE HCUP SID [46] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Patient Retrieval nDCG, HL Private Dataset ICU Patient Clustering SSE, NMI, AUC MIMIC-III [61] Feature Type Only - Next-tok ICU Trajectory Generation AUPRC MIMIC-III [70] Feature Type Only - Skip-gram ICU Patient Clustering HRR, AUC, ACC, NMI MIMIC-III continued on next page The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:27 

Reference Event Stream Modelling Training Strategy Applications 

Time Type & Value Supervised Self-Sup. Scenario Task Metric Dataset [168] Feature Type Only - Contrastive ICU Diagnosis AUC, AUPRC MIMIC-III 

2021 Year: 

[84] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Diagnosis PRE, REC, F1, WAUC Southeast China EHR [133] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC VA EHR [27] Feature Type Only ✓ - ED, Hospital, ICU Diagnosis F1, PRE, REC, AUC Cerner Health Facts [59] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC NHIS-NSC [8] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUPRC, AUC MIMIC-III [103] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction , Operational AUC, AUPRC, Kappa MIMIC-III [33] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Causal Inference RMSE UCI Diabetes [171] Feature Type Only - Next-tok Hospital Trajectory Generation AUC Vanderbilt SD [91] Feature Type Only - Masked Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC CUIMC-NYP 

2022 Year: 

[105] Feature Type & Value ✓ - ICU Trajectory Generation, Diagnosis F1, RMSE, M-PRE/REC MIMIC-II MIMIC-III [75] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC MIMIC-III [74] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC eICU MIMIC-III [110] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction AUC N3C [23] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Diagnosis R@k, P@k, AUC, F1 MIMIC-III ED MIMIC-IV-ED [124] Feature Type & Value ✓ - ICU Trajectory Generation LL, ACC, RMSE MIMIC-II [177] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Diagnosis MAP, F1, P@1 MIMIC-III [79] Feature Multimodal ✓ - ICU Diagnosis PRE, REC, F1 MIMIC-III [116] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC UFHealth [20] Feature Type & Value ✓ - ICU Medication Rec, Risk Prediction AUC MIMIC-III [34] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital, ICU Risk Prediction AUC STARR [41] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction C-idx, AUC, ACC MIMIC-III PLAGH HF [66] Feature Multimodal ✓ - Hospital Operational R@K, NDCG@K Chinese Tertiary [169] Feature Type Only - Masked ICU Diagnosis AUC, AUPRC MIMIC-IV Hospital UCLA [69] Feature Multimodal - Masked Hospital Medication Rec. JSC, F1, AUPRC Private [67] Feature Type Only - Contrastive Primary Care Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC CPRD [172] Feature Type Only - Contrastive Hospital Diagnosis AUC, AUPRC VUMC All of Us 

2023 Year: 

[4] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, PRE, REC, SPE Tays Heart Hospital [145] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction ACC, VAL MIMIC-III [119] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Diagnosis W-F1, WAUC MIMIC-III [160] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Diagnosis ACC MIMIC-III MIMIC-IV [32] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Medication Rec. F1, AUPRC, AP MIMIC-III [36] Feature Type Only ✓ - ED Operational (LoS) AUC, F1, MSE Danish EHR [62] Feature Multimodal ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC MIMIC-IV MIMIC-CXR MIMIC-Note [68] Feature Type Only ✓ - ED, Hospital, ICU Risk Prediction AUC Cerner Health Facts [151] Feature Type & Value ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUPRC, AUC eICU MIMIC-IV [54] Feature Type Only - Masked ICU Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC PhysioNet-2012 PhysioNet-2019 [158] Feature Type & Value - Masked ICU Risk Prediction, Phenotyping AUC, AUPRC, MAE, 𝜅 

PhysioNet-2012 MIMIC-III AmsterdamUMCdb [77] Feature Type Only - Next-tok ICU Trajectory Generation ND, JSD MIMIC-III ICU MIMIC-IV [82] Feature Type Only - Next-tok Hospital Risk Prediction AUC MIMIC-IV [161] Event Type Only - Next-tok Hospital Diagnosis AUC, AUPRC, PPV MIMIC-IV continued on next page 111:28 Mingcheng Zhu, Yu Liu, Zhiyao Luo, and Tingting Zhu 

Reference Event Stream Modelling Training Strategy Applications 

Time Type & Value Supervised Self-Sup. Scenario Task Metric Dataset [99] Feature Type Only - Next-tok Hospital Trajectory Generation ACC, F1, AUC 4TU Sepsis 

2024 Year: 

[113] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction PRE, REC, F1 NHIRD [83] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Diagnosis W-F1, R@10 MIMIC-III Hospital MIMIC-IV [13] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Diagnosis P@k, ACC@k MIMIC-III Hospital MIMIC-IV [88] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, SPE, SEN, PPV MIMIC-IV [19] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction RMSE Mayo Clinic [40] Feature Type Only ✓ - ED Diagnosis AUC Halland EHR [111] Feature Type Only ✓ - Primary Care, Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, SEN, PRE Alberta Health [134] Feature Type Only ✓ - Primary Care Risk Prediction AUC, C-idx, AUPRC Finnish Registry [121] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction ACC, PRE, REC Almazov Centre [51] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC, SEN, SPE UVA Hospital [57] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Diagnosis W-F1, W-AUC, HL MIMIC-III Synthetic Synthea [65] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Pathway Mining TC@10, NKQM@N Chinese Univ. Hosp. [150] Event Type Only - Next-tok ICU Risk Prediction AUC MIMIC-Instr [52] Feature Type Only - Next-tok Hospital Trajectory Generation AUC, F1, BLEU, R2 U.S. Insurer [102] Event Type & Value - Next-tok Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC, MAE MIMIC-IV [35] Feature Type & Value - Next-tok Hospital Risk Prediction AUC MIMIC-IV Hospital SickKids [156] Feature Type & Value - Next-tok ICU Trajectory Generation RMSE, ER MIMIC-II [142] Feature Multimodal - Next-tok Hospital Trajectory Generation, Risk Prediction r, AUC, SEN, NNAA Phase III Trial TOP [26] Feature Multimodal - Next-tok ICU Risk Prediction F1, AUC, AUPRC MIMIC-III [53] Feature Type Only - Masked ICU Risk Prediction LL, F1, AUC, AUPRC PhysioNet-2012 PhysioNet-2019 [89] Feature Type Only - Masked Hospital Anomaly Detection PRE, REC, F1 Consults/Labs [90] Feature Type & Value - Contrastive Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, AP MIMIC-IV [81] Feature Type Only - Contrastive ICU Risk Prediction, Diagnosis W-F1, R@k, AUC, F1 MIMIC-III Hospital MIMIC-IV 

2025 Year: 

[154] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction ACC, F1, RMSE, NLL Private [21] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction, Diagnosis ACC, RMSE, LL MIMIC-II [173] Feature Type Only ✓ - Hospital Trajectory Generation RMSE, Error Rate Private [29] Feature Type & Value ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction NLL EHRSHOT [63] Feature Multimodal ✓ - ED Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC, F1 UCLA Health ICU MIMIC-IV [109] Feature Multimodal ✓ - Primary Care Clinical Coding Jaccard IPCI [130] Feature Multimodal ✓ - Hospital Risk Prediction Sensitivity, Speci-ficity Private [22] Feature Multimodal ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction ACC, F1, R@k, NDCG MIMIC-III [80] Feature Type Only ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction F1, R@k, MIMIC-III AUC, F1 MIMIC-IV [163] Feature Type & Value ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC, F1, Recall MIMIC-III AmsterdamUMCdb [55] Feature Multimodal ✓ - Hospital Phenotyping AUC, AUPRC Private [141] Feature Type Only ✓ - Primary Care Survival Analysis C-index ORCPD [94] Feature Type Only ✓ - Primary Care Admission Prediction AUC, AUPRC SAIL [123] Feature Type Only - Next-tok Primary Care Risk Prediction, Medication Rec. R@k, AUC PopHR ICU eICU [129] Feature Type & Value - Next-tok Hospital Risk Prediction AUC, SEN, SPE MIMIC-IV [131] Feature Type & Value - Next-tok ICU Trajectory Generation, Risk Prediction F1, DI, TI MIMIC-IV eICU continued on next page The Taxonomies, Training, and Applications of Event Stream Modelling for Electronic Health Records 111:29 

Reference Event Stream Modelling Training Strategy Applications 

Time Type & Value Supervised Self-Sup. Scenario Task Metric Dataset [114] Event Type & Value - Next-tok ICU User Classification AUC, MAE MIMIC-IV [101] Event Type & Value - Next-tok ICU Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC, MAE MIMIC-IV [179] Event Type & Value - Next-tok ICU Risk Prediction F1 MIMIC-IV [109] Feature Multimodal - Skip-gram Primary Care Clinical Coding S2T%, T2S% IPCI Dutch GP [95] Feature Type Only - Contrastive Hospital Clinical Coding ACC, R@k Private [2] Feature Type Only - Contrastive ICU Risk Prediction, LoS AUC, ACC MIMIC-IV 

2026 Year: 

[14] Event Type & Value ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC, F1 MIMIC-IV ED, Hospital, ICU Risk Prediction, LoS EHRSHOT [165] Feature Type & Value ✓ - ICU Risk Prediction AUC, AUPRC MIMIC-III MIMIC-IV end of the table 

Abbreviations Area Under Curve (AUC), Area Under Precision–Recall Curve (AUPRC), Precision–Recall AUC (AUPRC), Accuracy (ACC), Accuracy@k (ACC@k), Precision (PRE), Recall (REC), F1-score (F1), Weighted F1-score (W-F1), Sensitivity (SEN), Specificity (SPE), Positive Predictive Value (PPV), Negative Predictive Value (NPV), Mean Average Precision (mAP), Mean Average Precision@k (MAP@k), Precision@k (P@k), Recall@k (R@k), Precision@1 (P@1), Recall@1 (R@1), Recall@N (R@N), Weighted AUC (WAUC or W-AUC), Jaccard Similarity (JS), Average Recall (AR), Validity (VAL), Log-likelihood (LL), Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), Error Rate (ER), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Mean Squared Error (MSE), Concordance index (C-idx), Cohen’s Kappa (Kappa), Median Absolute Deviation (MAD), Normalised Discounted Cumulative Gain (nDCG), nDCG@k (NDCG@k), Topic Coherence at top-10 (TC@10), Normalised Key–Query Matching at N (NKQM@N), Hamming Loss (HL), Half-Life Utility (HLU), Pearson correlation (r), Normalised Nearest Average Accuracy (NNAA), Hospital Readmission Rate (HRR), Medication Recommendation (Med Rec).