Title: CORE-Acu: Structured Reasoning Traces and Knowledge Graph Safety Verification for Acupuncture Clinical Decision Support

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.08321v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 02:15:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# CORE-Acu: Structured Reasoning Traces and Knowledge Graph Safety Verification for Acupuncture Clinical Decision Support 

Liuyi Xu a, Yun Guo a, Ming Chen a, Zihan Dun b, Yining Qian c, ∗, An-Yang Lu a, Shuang Li d, Lijun Liu e,f 

> aCollege of Information Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China
> bSchool of Information Science and Engineering, Yanshan University, Qinhuangdao, Hebei 066000, China
> cSchool of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China
> dSchool of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing 100000, China
> eKey Laboratory of Bioresource Research and Development of Liaoning Province, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110169, China
> fCollege of Life and Health Sciences, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110169, China

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) show significant potential for clinical decision support (CDS), yet their black-box nature— characterized by untraceable reasoning and probabilistic hallucinations—poses severe challenges in acupuncture, a field demanding rigorous interpretability and safety. To address this, we propose CORE-Acu, a neuro-symbolic framework for acupuncture clinical decision support that integrates Structured Chain-of-Thought (S-CoT) with knowledge graph (KG) safety verification. First, we construct the first acupuncture Structured Reasoning Trace dataset and a schema-constrained fine-tuning framework. By enforcing an explicit causal chain from pattern identification to treatment principles, treatment plans, and acupoint selection, we transform implicit Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) reasoning into interpretable generation constraints, mitigating the opacity of LLM-based CDS. Furthermore, we construct a TCM safety knowledge graph and establish a “Generate–Verify–Revise” closed-loop inference system based on a Symbolic Veto Mechanism, employing deterministic rules to intercept hallucinations and enforce hard safety boundaries. Finally, we introduce the Lexicon-Matched Entity-Reweighted Loss (LMERL), which corrects terminology drift caused by the frequency–importance mismatch in general optimization by adaptively amplifying gradient contributions of high-risk entities during fine-tuning. Experiments on 1,000 held-out cases demonstrate CORE-Acu’s superior entity fidelity and reasoning quality. Crucially, CORE-Acu achieved 0 /1,000 observed safety violations (95% CI: 0–0.37%), whereas GPT-4o exhibited an 8.5% violation rate under identical rules. These results establish CORE-Acu as a robust neuro-symbolic framework for acupuncture clinical decision support, guaranteeing both reasoning auditability and strict safety compliance. 

Keywords: Large language models, Neuro-symbolic AI, Knowledge graph, Safety verification, Traditional Chinese Medicine, Clinical decision support systems, Structured reasoning trace dataset 

1. Introduction 

In medical natural language processing (NLP), large lan-guage models (LLMs) have progressed from general-purpose question answering to supporting complex clinical workflows, including clinical text summarization, evidence retrieval, and clinical decision support (CDS) [1, 2]. Despite strong per-formance of domain-adapted models on standardized bench-marks [3, 4], their deployment in high-stakes CDS faces a fundamental trust gap. This gap arises from an inherent mis-match: LLMs are primarily optimized for probabilistic next-token prediction, which o ff ers neither determinism nor trans-parent, auditable reasoning. While probabilistic fluency may be adequate for open-domain dialogue, clinical settings require            

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email addresses: xuliuyi@mails.neu.edu.cn (Liuyi Xu),
> guoyun@mails.neu.edu.cn (Yun Guo), chenm4@mails.neu.edu.cn
> (Ming Chen), dunzihan@stumail.ysu.edu.cn (Zihan Dun),
> qianyiningning@126.com (Yining Qian), luanyang@mail.neu.edu.cn
> (An-Yang Lu), shuangliai@buaa.edu.cn (Shuang Li),
> liulijun@mail.neu.edu.cn (Lijun Liu)

outputs with internally consistent reasoning and safety guaran-tees [5]. Without explicit logical constraints, even strong med-ical LLMs can produce hallucinations—linguistically plausible yet clinically incorrect recommendations—thereby jeopardiz-ing patient safety [6, 7]. These challenges are further amplified in Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM). Unlike modern medicine, which is guided by standardized clinical guidelines, TCM clinical practice hinges on a highly contextualized reasoning process known as syn-drome di ff erentiation and treatment ( bianzheng lunzhi ). Bridg-ing the gap between symptoms and prescriptions typically re-quires critical intermediate steps, including syndrome identifi-cation (Diagnosis), pathogenesis analysis (Pathology), and the formulation of therapeutic principles (Principle). However, ex-isting large models often bypass these implicit reasoning steps and instead attempt to learn a direct mapping from symptoms to prescriptions. This black-box generation paradigm not only makes the reasoning process non-auditable but also frequently yields reasoning–output discrepancies—cases in which an ap-parently appropriate prescription is produced despite flawed 

> arXiv:2603.08321v1 [cs.AI] 9 Mar 2026

intermediate reasoning—thereby undermining clinical usabil-ity [8]. Furthermore, among TCM subdomains, acupuncture im-poses unique challenges regarding contraindications due to its nature as an invasive physical intervention. Unlike herbal pre-scriptions, acupuncture entails physical manipulation at spe-cific anatomical locations, requiring strict adherence to exclu-sion criteria to prevent medical malpractice. Failures to respect these “red lines” can directly endanger patient safety. For in-stance, in pregnancy-related cases, prescribing Hegu (LI4)— an acupoint traditionally contraindicated due to its association with promoting uterine activity—may increase the risk of se-vere adverse outcomes. Despite these high stakes, standard LLMs relying on unconstrained probabilistic decoding lack ro-bust mechanisms to enforce non-negotiable clinical constraints. Consequently, generated prescriptions remain vulnerable to un-controlled safety hazards, as neural generation alone provides limited guarantees for strictly suppressing rule-violating out-puts. Beyond strict prohibitions, the high-fidelity handling of safety-critical entities—including acupoint identifiers and meridian attribution—presents a precision challenge. In this context, minor terminological discrepancies can lead to dispro-portionately severe consequences. For example, distinguishing Taixi (KI3) from Taiyuan (LU9) hinges on a single character, yet their therapeutic indications and meridian a ffi liations dif-fer substantially. However, standard optimization objectives in general LLMs, such as cross-entropy loss, typically assign uni-form weighting to all tokens, creating a frequency–importance mismatch. The training signal penalizes mispredicting a safety-critical acupoint name no more than mispredicting a common stopword. This mismatch exacerbates terminology drift and weakens the model’s ability to precisely generate high-risk en-tities amidst common vocabulary. To address these gaps, we propose CORE-Acu (Con-strained Ontology Reasoning Engine for Acupuncture), aneuro-symbolic framework that integrates structured reasoning traces with knowledge graph (KG) safety verification. Specifi-cally, we construct structured reasoning traces to illuminate the reasoning black box, deploy a symbolic veto mechanism to in-tercept safety violations, and introduce re-weighted learning to rectify entity imprecision. Our contributions are threefold: 

• Structured Chain-of-Thought (S-CoT) and Schema-Constrained Fine-Tuning: We construct the first acupuncture S-CoT dataset and introduce a schema-constrained fine-tuning paradigm. By enforcing an ex-plicit causal chain from pattern identification to therapeu-tic principles and acupoint selection, we convert implicit TCM reasoning into interpretable, schema-compliant out-puts, thereby mitigating the black-box limitation. 

• Symbolic Veto Mechanism for Hard Safety Bound-aries: We propose a neuro-symbolic governance module featuring a Symbolic Veto Mechanism. By constructing a dedicated TCM contraindication KG as the symbolic sub-strate, the module orchestrates a Generate–Verify–Revise 

inference loop. This mechanism leverages determinis-tic rules to intercept rule-violating generations (e.g., con-traindicated acupoints) in real time, strictly enforcing hard safety constraints. 

• Lexicon-Matched Entity-Reweighted Loss (LMERL): 

We propose LMERL to address the terminology drift in-duced by the frequency-importance mismatch. By in-jecting domain priors during fine-tuning, this mecha-nism adaptively up-weights gradients for high-risk enti-ties, thereby improving the precision and robustness of safety-critical terminology generation. 

2. Related Work 

2.1. Large Language Models in TCM and Clinical Constraints 

Although LLMs have demonstrated strong capabilities in clinical interaction and clinical text summarization [9], their use in high-stakes clinical decision support remains limited by hallucinations and poor reasoning traceability. Within TCM, re-cent e ff orts have developed domain-adapted models—including HuatuoGPT [10], Zhongjing [11], and BianCang [12]— primarily via instruction fine-tuning on large-scale medical di-alogues and classical TCM texts. However, most existing work centers on herbal prescription generation or general patient in-quiry, leaving safety-critical procedural subdomains compara-tively underexamined. In particular, acupuncture diagnosis and prescription remain underexplored and present distinct challenges [8, 13]. Unlike herbal medicine, acupuncture involves invasive, needle-based interventions at specific anatomical locations. This setting re-quires a rigorous and interpretable reasoning chain that explic-itly links syndrome di ff erentiation, therapeutic principles, and precise acupoint selection. Yet, existing approaches often col-lapse this multi-step process into a direct symptom-to-acupoint mapping [14]. Without transparent diagnostic logic and au-ditable intermediate reasoning, such black-box models are un-likely to satisfy the safety requirements for clinical adoption or earn physician trust. To reduce generation risks, recent studies have explored in-tegrating retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) with KG [15]. While these methods can improve evidence grounding, KGs are typically used as retrieval resources rather than as sym-bolic constraints for safety verification. In high-stakes settings such as acupuncture, probabilistic grounding alone is insu ffi -cient; explicit, rule-based governance mechanisms are needed to enforce contraindication rules (e.g., pregnancy-related re-strictions). This gap motivates our proposed neuro-symbolic framework. 

2.2. Optimization Objectives in Domain Adaptation 

Although parameter-e ffi cient fine-tuning (PEFT) has be-come a de facto standard for adapting LLMs [16–18], most approaches retain the same cross-entropy objective inherited 2from general pre-training. This choice induces a frequency– importance mismatch in clinical generation: under uniform to-ken weighting (by default), the training signal encourages mod-els to fit high-frequency function words while under-penalizing errors on sparse yet safety-critical entities [19, 20]. Although keyword-aware objectives have been explored in speech recog-nition and information retrieval [21–23], entity-driven gradi-ent reweighting remains under-studied for long-context clinical reasoning, particularly when strict terminological precision is required in acupuncture [24]. 

2.3. Evaluation 

Reliable evaluation of accuracy and safety for generation in high-risk medical settings remains challenging. Traditional n-gram metrics such as BLEU [25] and ROUGE [26] primarily measure surface lexical overlap and are poorly aligned with clinical logic or semantic consistency [27]. As a result, un-safe or logically flawed recommendations can still obtain high overlap scores, limiting their utility for safety auditing. Recently, LLM-as-a-judge has been used to score genera-tion quality with strong foundation models [27–29]. However, generic judges may lack domain-specific nuances in TCM, and can mis-evaluate complex acupuncture reasoning without ex-pert calibration. RAG and knowledge-grounding can improve input evidence, but do not guarantee faithful use of retrieved information [30]. Studies on RAG faithfulness report knowledge conflicts, where models prefer erroneous parametric memory over provided ev-idence [31, 32]; models may also underutilize retrieved context due to position e ff ects or limited reasoning, leading to unfaith-ful hallucinations despite accurate inputs. These findings sug-gest that input-side enhancement alone is insu ffi cient for clini-cal safety, motivating post-hoc verification. Moreover, prevailing evaluation pipelines predominantly ter-minate at the scoring phase, failing to o ff er actionable mecha-nisms for error rectification. While recent studies have explored intrinsic self-correction strategies [33, 34], relying solely on a model’s latent behavior often yields unstable results. Conse-quently, there remains a lack of robust frameworks capable of translating evaluation feedback into deterministic revision in-structions. Accordingly, we introduce a verifiable Generate– Verify–Revise closed-loop framework. By integrating multi-source adjudication with explicit rewriting protocols, our ap-proach is designed to not only identify safety risks but also fa-cilitate their systematic mitigation. 

3. Methodology 

The overall framework of CORE-Acu, illustrated in Fig. 1, integrates structured reasoning traces with knowledge-graph-based safety verification. The framework operates through a Construction–Adaptation–Verification lifecycle, designed to approach the limitations of unstructured black-box models identified in the introduction. The architecture consists of four tightly coupled components designed to operationalize clinical reasoning logic: 1. Structured Reasoning Trace Construction (Sec. 3.1): 

We first address the lack of traceability by constructing a S-CoT dataset (Module 1). This component explicitly maps the causal pathway from symptoms to acupoints, transforming implicit reasoning into observable logic. 2. TCM Knowledge Graph Construction (Sec. 3.2): To provide a rigid safety boundary, we build a domain-specific KG (Module 2). This symbolic substrate serves as the ground truth for acupoint attributes and contraindi-cation rules, enabling deterministic verification. 3. Entity-Aware Adaptation (Sec. 3.3): To mitigate entity-level hallucinations, we introduce the LMERL (Module 3). This mechanism aligns the model’s optimization fo-cus with high-stakes clinical terminology during instruc-tion tuning. 4. Neuro-Symbolic Closed-Loop Reasoning (Sec. 3.4): Fi-nally, we develop a neuro-symbolic closed-loop system (Module 4) to operationalize the safety governance. Un-like static filtering, this module implements a dynamic 

Generate–Verify–Revise reasoning cycle. By leveraging the TCM-KG as a symbolic supervisor, the system it-eratively detects potential contraindication violations and provides feedback to the neural generator, thereby striving to achieve a self-corrected and safety-compliant output. By integrating these components, CORE-Acu transforms the generation process from an open-ended probability distribution into a bounded, verifiable clinical decision workflow. 

3.1. S-CoT Dataset Construction and Schema 

To support verifiable and interpretable acupuncture clini-cal reasoning, we constructed Acu-Reasoning, which is, to our knowledge, the first large-scale acupuncture S-CoT dataset comprising 42,512 samples. Unlike traditional medical corpora that rely on shallow instruction–response pairs, this dataset ex-plicitly encodes the complete causal chain from symptom re-porting to acupoint selection (see Table Appendix A.3 for a de-tailed case instance). 

3.1.1. Causal Modeling of Acupuncture Prescription 

We model the acupuncture prescription task as a sequential decision process rather than a direct mapping. Traditional Su-pervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) typically optimizes a conditional probability P(A|C), directly mapping clinical complaints C to prescriptions A. However, this shallow mapping encourages models to learn statistical shortcuts, bypassing the critical di-agnostic logic required for safety. To address this, we designed a strict schema to enforce the learning of latent reasoning states: Bian Zheng (Diagnosis, D)

→ Bing Ji (Pathology, P) → Zhi Ze (Principle, T ) → Xuan Xue 

(Acupoints, A). By explicitly modeling these intermediate vari-ables, we factorize the generation probability according to the clinical causal order: 3Figure 1: Overall architecture of the CORE-Acu framework. The framework operates in two phases: (1) Phase I (O ffl ine Training): Module 1 constructs the S-CoT corpus to model the clinical causal chain, while Module 2 builds the TCM KG. These inputs guide Module 3 to fine-tune the LLM via LMERL, focusing on safety-critical entities. (2) Phase II (Online Inference): Module 4 implements a neuro-symbolic closed-loop mechanism, leveraging KG constraints from Module 2 to verify prescriptions and trigger bounded self-correction for guaranteed safety. 

PΘ(D, P, T, A | C)

= P(D|C)P(P|C, D)

| {z }

> Bian Zheng (Diagnosis)

· P(T |C, D, P)

| {z }

> Lun Zhi (Planning)

· P(A|D, P, T )

| {z }

> Xuan Xue (Selection)

(1) where Θ represents the model parameters. This factoriza-tion imposes a structural constraint: the model cannot generate acupoints A based solely on symptoms C. Instead, it must first resolve the intermediate variables ( D, P, T ), thereby making the reasoning process observable and machine-verifiable. The de-tailed schema definition is provided in Table Appendix C.4. 

3.1.2. Data Curation Pipeline 

To construct this high-quality corpus in alignment with the proposed causal model, we implemented a rigorous three-stage human-in-the-loop pipeline: 1. Heterogeneous Source Aggregation: We aggregated raw clinical records from authoritative TCM case report collec-tions, textbooks, and classical literature. These sources are highly unstructured, often containing implicit reasoning. 2. Logic-Driven Restructuring: This was the most labor-intensive phase. Since raw records often omit intermediate steps obvious to experts, we employed a semi-automated inference-and-verify strategy. We utilized a foundation model (GPT-5.2) prompted with our strict clinical schema to extract explicit fields and, crucially, to infer missing log-ical links (e.g., deducing the therapeutic principle implied by a specific diagnosis). This transformed implicit clinical narratives into fully explicit reasoning chains. 3. Expert Causal Verification: A panel of three senior TCM practitioners reviewed a stratified sample (10%) of the dataset. Unlike standard QA checks, this review focused on causal consistency: verifying that the diagnosis log-ically supported the principle , and that the acupoints 

were valid implementations of that principle. Errors in en-tity extraction or causal logic were corrected, and these corrections served as feedback to iteratively refine the ex-traction prompts. The resulting dataset serves as the backbone for supervising the model’s reasoning capabilities. 

3.2. TCM Knowledge Graph Construction for Symbolic Safety Governance 

To complement the probabilistic reasoning of S-CoT with a 

deterministic substrate for intercepting hallucinations, we con-structed a domain-specific KG, which serves as the symbolic ground truth for a Veto Mechanism. Unlike traditional TCM knowledge bases designed for general information retrieval, our schema prioritizes constraint modeling, aiming to translate hard safety boundaries into computable logic. 4Figure 2: The Triangulated Neuro-Symbolic Validation Framework of CORE-Acu. The protocol begins with a Symbolic Veto Mechanism that utilizes the TCM KG to deterministically intercept hard safety violations, e ff ectively reducing the Safety Violation Rate. Validated outputs then undergo multidimensional adjudication and expert cognitive verification, which scrutinize the causal reasoning chain to distinguish authentic clinical logic from black-box memorization traps. 

3.2.1. Ontology Standardization and Lexical Anchoring 

To establish an authoritative auditing standard, we strictly aligned the graph schema with the WHO International Standard Terminologies and the National Standard GB /T 12346-2006 .This rigorous standardization serves dual critical functions: (1) It resolves terminological ambiguity (e.g., synonymy risks), preventing the model from bypassing safety checks due to nam-ing variations; (2) It provides Lexical Anchors for our Lexicon-Matched Entity-Reweighted Loss (LMERL, see Sec. 3.3), en-suring consistency between the training objective and the veri-fication rules. 

3.2.2. Expert-Curated Constraint Modeling 

A key innovation in our pipeline is the transformation of unstructured clinical warnings into machine-verifiable graph relations. Through Expert-Curated Constraint Modeling, we explicitly encoded over 1,200 hard constraints extracted from classical texts and modern guidelines. These are represented not merely as text attributes, but as directed logical edges to enforce a symbolic veto: 

• Conditional Prohibition Edges: These encode dy-namic constraints where an acupoint is generally safe but strictly prohibited under specific patient states (e.g., 

LI 4 ProhibitedFor 

−−−−−−−−−−−−→ Pregnancy ). 

• Anatomical Risk Attributes: Nodes are enriched with physical metadata (e.g., DeepNeedlingRisk ,

VitalOrganProximity ) to flag high-risk operations requiring secondary confirmation. Structurally, the KG is organized into three functional lay-ers—Diagnostic, Therapeutic, and Physical Safety—to mirror the S-CoT reasoning chain, enabling step-by-step verification from diagnosis to intervention. The final graph comprises 4,628 nodes and 12,500 edges (Table 1), covering approximately 90% of routine clinical pathways. 

3.3. Domain-Adaptive Optimization via Lexicon-Matched Entity-Reweighted Loss 

To address the fundamental Frequency–Importance Mis-match where the information density of acupuncture is in-versely distributed relative to the natural long-tail token fre-quency (Zipf’s law)—we propose the LMERL. This objec-tive functions as a domain-adaptive filter, explicitly reshaping the gradient landscape to focus on rare yet safety-critical en-tities that are typically overwhelmed by high-frequency func-tional words. Unlike standard Cross-Entropy (CE) objectives that treat all tokens uniformly and prioritize linguistic fluency, LMERL aligns the optimization focus with clinical importance rather than statistical frequency. 

3.3.1. Mathematical Formulation 

Let D = {(x, y)} denote the training corpus, where y =

(y1, . . . , yT ) is the structured S-CoT response. We utilize the 5Table 1: Schema Definition and Statistics of the Proposed TCM-KG. The graph integrates standardized acupoint attributes with expert-verified clinical reasoning logic. 

Category Node Entity Semantics Description Count Basic Info 

AcuCode Standard alphanumeric code (e.g., LI4). 361 AcuName Standard Romanized /Pinyin name. 361 Category The Meridian or Channel attribution. 14 CategoryType Functional classification. 28 

Clinical 

Disease Western or Traditional disease names. 520 Symptom Discrete clinical symptoms or complaints. 1,240 Pattern TCM Syndromes (Bian-Zheng / Zheng). 192 

Reasoning Mechanism Pathological mechanism explaining illness. 850 Principle Therapeutic principles guiding treatment. 410 

Treatment Combo Validated acupoint combinations. 652 

Total Total Nodes (Entities) 4,628 Total Relations (Edges) 12,500 

domain lexicon Vdom (derived from the KG in Sec. 3.2) as the set of Lexical Anchors .To decouple optimization priority from token frequency, LMERL assigns a dynamic importance score ω(yt) to each to-ken. The optimization objective is formalized as the expected entity-weighted negative log-likelihood: 

LLMERL (Θ) = −E(x,y)∼D 

 1

Z(y)

> T

X

> t=1

ω(yt) · log PΘ(yt | x, y<t)



(2) where Z(y) = PTt=1 ω(yt) serves as a sequence-level normaliza-tion factor to prevent gradient scale drift across samples with varying entity densities. Crucially, the importance function ω(yt) is designed as a piecewise step function to selectively amplify the gradient sig-nal for long-tail domain terms: 

ω(yt) =



α if yt ∈ V dom (Domain Anchors) 1 otherwise (General Syntax) (3) where α > 1 is a hyperparameter governing the intensity of the domain bias. 

3.3.2. Gradient Focusing in Parameter-E ffi cient Tuning 

This reweighting strategy provides a necessary inductive bias for Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA). Since LoRA updates are constrained to low-rank matrices ∆Θ with a limited parame-ter budget, standard uniform optimization often results in these scarce parameters being diluted by general syntactic fitting. By setting α = 1.5 (determined via sensitivity analysis, see Sec. 5.3), LMERL e ff ectively implements Gradient Focusing: it steers the updates of ∆Θ specifically toward the manifold of domain-critical entities, ensuring that the adaptation capacity is allocated to establishing precise clinical mappings rather than general linguistic redundancy. 

3.4. Neuro-Symbolic Closed-Loop Governance 

Standard LLM inference acts as an open-loop process: once a token is generated, it is typically immutable. In high-stakes medicine, this “generate-and-hope” paradigm is unacceptable. We therefore implement a Closed-Loop Neuro-Symbolic Con-trol System that treats the LLM’s output not as a final decision, but as a tentative proposal subject to rigorous symbolic audit-ing. 

3.4.1. Symbolic Constraint Definition 

We define the safety boundary using the KG constructed in Sec. 3.2. Let G = (V, E) be the KG. We isolate a subset of edge types Runsafe ⊂ E representing clini-cally prohibitive relations, such as point-to-point antagonisms (IncompatibleWith ) and state-dependent contraindications (ProhibitedForCondition ). Formally, given a patient context C (extracted conditions) and a candidate prescription A (generated acupoints), the Vi-olation Set V is computed via graph intersection operations: 

V(C, A) = [( A × R unsafe × A ) ∩ E ]

| {z }

> Internal Conflicts

∪ [( C × R unsafe × A ) ∩ E ]

| {z }

> Contraindications

(4) The proposal is deemed unsafe if V(C, A) , ∅.

3.4.2. The Generate–Verify–Revise (GVR) Loop 

To enforce these constraints dynamically, we deploy abounded iterative refinement mechanism (see Algorithm 1). 6Algorithm 1: Closed-Loop Inference with Symbolic Veto 

Input: Query Q, Model Mθ, KG G, Unsafe Relations 

Runsafe , Budget Tmax 

Output: Safe Recommendation P or Fallback 

C ← Extract Conditions (Q) // Patient Context 

Q(0) ← Q

for t ← 0 to Tmax − 1 do 

P(t) ← Mθ(Q(t)) // Neural Proposal 

A(t) ← Extract Acupoints (P(t))

V(t) ← Check Violations (C, A(t), G, Runsafe )

// Symbolic Veto 

if V(t) = ∅ then return P(t) // Accepted 

end 

// Inject Negative Feedback 

Q(t+1) ← Construct Feedback (Q, P(t), V(t))

end return Safe Fallback (“Human Confirmation Required”) 

Initially, the fine-tuned model MΘ generates a preliminary S-CoT response P(0) . This tentative proposal is immediately parsed by the safety module to compute the violation set V(0) 

via Eq. (4). Crucially, if violations are detected, the system does not simply reject the output; instead, it injects a Negative Feedback Signal. A corrective prompt, enriched with specific evidence triples (e.g., “Error: LI4 is ProhibitedFor Pregnancy”), is fed back into the model. This explicit error signal guides the model to revise the prescription while retaining the valid diag-nostic logic. To guarantee safety convergence, this refinement loop is bounded by a maximum iteration threshold Tmax . In scenar-ios where the model fails to resolve conflicts within these steps (i.e., V(Tmax ) , ∅), a Conservative Fail-Safe is triggered. This Hard Fallback mechanism suppresses the neural output entirely, reverting to a default warning. This design ensures that CORE-Acu operates strictly within an explicit Safety Envelope, pre-venting the release of hazardous hallucinations. 

4. Experiments 

In this section, we present a comprehensive evaluation of the CORE-Acu framework, focusing on reasoning trace qual-ity, safety compliance, and entity fidelity. We first outline the datasets and baseline models, followed by the evaluation proto-cols. For reproducibility, the detailed implementation specifi-cations, including hardware configurations and hyperparameter settings, are summarized in Table 2. 

4.1. Datasets 

We evaluate CORE-Acu using the Acu-Reasoning dataset (constructed in Section 3.1) and a strictly held-out test set. The data partitions are defined as follows: 

• Training and Validation Sets: The Acu-Reasoning cor-pus comprises a total of 42,512 samples. We partition this corpus into a training set of 38,260 samples (90%) and a validation set of 4,252 samples (10%) for hyperparame-ter tuning and early stopping. This split ensures that the model learns the structured S-CoT schema and domain logic prior to final evaluation. 

• Held-out Test Set (Quantitative, N = 1, 000 ): To as-sess generalization, we utilize 1,000 de-identified clinical cases that are strictly excluded from the training and vali-dation phases. These cases cover diverse departments and disease types, serving as the basis for large-sample quan-titative evaluation metrics (Surface Overlap, Safety, and LLM-as-a-Judge scoring). 

• Complex Case Subset (Qualitative, n = 4): From the held-out test set, we select four clinically representative complex cases. These cases are characterized by conflict-ing symptoms or multi-pattern complications, serving as a focused subset for fine-grained human expert review to inspect reasoning coherence and interpretability.                               

> Table 2: Implementation Details of Experimental Setup.
> Parameter Value /Specification
> Hardware Infrastructure
> CPU 16 vCPU on AMD EPYC 9654 GPU NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 (24GB)
> LoRA Fine-tuning Setup
> Base Model Qwen3-8B Fine-tuning Type LoRA Rank r16 LoRA Scaling 32 LoRA Dropout 0.05 Max Seq. Length 2048 Epochs 3Learning Rate 1×10 −4
> Warmup Ratio 0.05 Batch Size (Per-device) 2Grad. Accum. Steps 16 (E ff ective batch =32) Weight Decay 0.01 Gradient Clipping Max norm 0.5 Validation Split 10% held out Keyword Weight 1.5
> KG-Constrained Inference
> Retry Budget Tmax 5Unsafe Relations Incompatible ,ProhibitedFor
> Fallback Policy Human confirmation request

4.2. Baselines 

We benchmark CORE-Acu against five baselines spanning frontier general-purpose LLMs and medical-domain models, so as to assess both overall generation quality and the ability to comply with acupuncture-specific clinical constraints. 

• GPT-4o: A frontier proprietary general-purpose LLM re-leased by OpenAI, widely used as a strong reference point 7for general reasoning and instruction following. We in-clude it to represent a high-capability closed-source model and to examine how far pure probabilistic generation can go without domain-specific safety governance. 

• Qwen-Max: A flagship commercial Chinese general-purpose LLM in the Qwen family, available via API and designed to support long-context usage in practical appli-cations. We select it as a strong Chinese-language baseline to control for language coverage and to benchmark against a widely deployed industrial model. 

• GLM-4.6: A recent general-purpose model from Zhipu AI that is positioned for complex agentic and coding-oriented workloads and supports a long context window. We use it as an additional strong non-medical baseline to test whether improvements in general capability and long-context handling translate into safer acupuncture prescrip-tions without explicit clinical constraints. 

• HuatuoGPT-o1-7B: An open medical LLM oriented to-ward medical reasoning, which explicitly produces a de-liberative reasoning process before the final answer. We include it to evaluate whether domain-specialized medi-cal models better respect acupuncture-related clinical con-straints compared with general-purpose LLMs. 

• Qwen3-8B (base): The pretrained backbone model used in our framework prior to any domain adaptation or in-struction tuning. This baseline isolates the contribution of our fine-tuning and entity-aware optimization by quantify-ing improvements over the same underlying base model. 

4.3. Evaluation Metrics and Protocols 

To comprehensively assess model performance, we design a hierarchical evaluation strategy organized into three distinct levels of scrutiny: (1) Automated Surface Metrics to measure lexical fidelity and entity coverage; (2) KG-Grounded Verifica-tion to enforce hard safety boundaries; and (3) a Hybrid Multi-dimensional Assessment to evaluate clinical reasoning depth. 1. Surface Overlap and Entity Fidelity: We report BLEU-4 and ROUGE-L to quantify surface-form lexical prox-imity to reference prescriptions. All outputs are pre-processed by removing formatting artifacts and tokenized using Jieba for Chinese text. BLEU-4 is computed at the sentence level with smooth-ing and macro-averaged over N cases: BLEU-4 = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

BP (i) · exp 



14

> 4

X

> n=1

log ˜ p(i)

> n

 (5) where ˜ p(i) 

> n

denotes the smoothed modified n-gram preci-sion and BP (i) is the brevity penalty. ROUGE-L (F1) is computed based on the longest com-mon subsequence (LCS): ROUGE-L = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

2P(i)LCS R(i)LCS 

P(i)LCS + R(i)LCS 

(6) To assess domain-specific precision beyond general text overlap, we define Entity-F1 . We extract key medical en-tities (POS tags: n, nr, ns, nt, nz, vn ; length > 1) and compute the macro-averaged F1 score: Entity-F1 = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

2P(i)ent R(i)ent 

P(i)ent + R(i)ent 

(7) where P(i)ent and R(i)ent denote the precision and recall of the predicted entity set E(i)pred against the reference E(i)ref .2. KG-Grounded Safety Verification: Since overlap met-rics cannot detect dangerous medical errors, we employ our TCM-KG to compute two rigorous safety indicators: 

Entity Hallucination Rate (EntHall): This measures the proportion of generated acupoints that do not exist in the canonical ontology. For case i, with predicted acupoint set 

A(i)pred and KG vocabulary AKG :EntHall = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

A(i)pred \ A KG 

A(i)pred + ϵ

(8) 

Safety Violation Rate (SVR): This metric flags strictly pro-hibited recommendations. A case is deemed unsafe if the verifier detects any evidence triple in the generated output. Let V(C(i), A(i)pred ) be the violation set returned by the safety module: SVR = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

IhV(C(i), A(i)pred ) , ∅i × 100% (9) 3. Multidimensional Reasoning Assessment (Hybrid Pro-tocol): To capture the nuances of clinical logic missed by automated metrics while balancing evaluation inter-pretability (depth) with coverage (breadth), we evaluate reasoning quality using a five-dimension clinical rubric (0–10 points each, 0–50 total): 

Reasoning Validity: Logical coherence of the causal chain. 

Diagnostic Accuracy: Correctness of syndrome dif-ferentiation. 

Pathological Logic: Alignment with TCM etiologi-cal theory. 

Prescription Rationality: Justification of acupoint selection. 

Explicability: Structural clarity and professional standardization. 

Protocol: We implement this rubric via a Hybrid Ap-proach: 

• Depth (Human Expert): Three senior TCM practi-tioners ( > 10 years experience) perform an indepen-dent, back-to-back assessment of the Complex Case 8Subset ( n = 4). To guarantee objectivity and mitigate consensus bias, experts evaluate the interpretability of the generated content in strictly isolated environ-ments, serving as a rigorous benchmark for clinical validity. 

• Breadth (LLM-as-a-Judge): GPT-5.2 evaluates the full Held-out Test Set ( N = 1, 000) to statistically validate the scalability of reasoning improvements.           

> Table 3: Detailed Configuration of the LLM-as-a-Judge Evaluation.
> Configuration Item Value /Specification
> Judge Model GPT-5.2 (via OpenAI API) Call Date December 2025 Temperature 0.1 Top_p 1.0 Max Tokens 2048 Scoring Scale 0–50 Total Score (5 dimensions, 0–10 each) Evaluated Cases 1,000 clinical cases

5. Main Results 

In this section, we systematically evaluate the performance of CORE-Acu across diverse clinical dimensions. We begin by reporting the automated surface and entity metrics to assess lexical fidelity (Section 5.1). Subsequently, we present a mul-tidimensional reasoning assessment using the LLM-as-a-judge protocol, followed by a sensitivity analysis of the entity re-weighting factor. Finally, we examine the framework’s safety compliance through KG-grounded verification and corroborate the findings with qualitative expert review. 

5.1. Textual Generation Quality: Lexical Fidelity and Entity Precision 

To assess the generation quality on a textual level, we con-ducted an automated evaluation on the held-out test set com-prising 1,000 cases. Table 4 summarizes the performance of CORE-Acu against the baseline models across three represen-tative metrics: BLEU-4, ROUGE-L, and the domain-specific Entity-F1 Score. Detailed breakdowns for all n-gram and en-tity metrics (including BLEU-1 /2/3, ROUGE-1 /2, and Preci-sion /Recall) are provided in Appendix B. As indicated in Table 4, CORE-Acu demonstrates a clear ad-vantage in domain-specific fidelity. Among the general-purpose baselines (GPT-4o, Qwen-Max, and GLM-4.6), the generated text is often linguistically fluent, yet their lower Entity-F1 scores (0.2906, 0.3087, and 0.3511, respectively) suggest that they still tend to hallucinate, substitute, or omit clinically salient entities such as acupoints and syndromic terms. In contrast, CORE-Acu attains an Entity-F1 of 0.4612, supporting the ef-fectiveness of the LMERL (Section 3.3) in improving attention to hard medical facts and reducing entity-level inconsistency.      

> Table 4: Automated Evaluation Results on the Held-out Test Set. CORE-Acu achieves the best performance among the evaluated baselines across all metrics. Note: Entity-F1 measures the strict overlap of key medical entities (Acupoints, Syndromes) against the ground truth.

Model BLEU-4 ROUGE-L Entity-F1 CORE-Acu (Ours) 0.1898 0.3334 0.4612 

GLM-4.6 0.0697 0.1970 0.3511 HuatuoGPT-o1-7B 0.0059 0.1209 0.2161 Qwen3-8B (Base) 0.0814 0.1883 0.3062 Qwen-Max (General) 0.0865 0.1988 0.3087 GPT-4o 0.0722 0.1985 0.2906 

The medical-domain baseline HuatuoGPT-o1-7B underper-forms across all three metrics (BLEU-4: 0.0059; ROUGE-L: 0.1209; Entity-F1: 0.2161). One likely factor is that, while HuatuoGPT is optimized for general medical dialogue, it does not explicitly enforce the task-specific structured output and acupuncture entity constraints required by our evaluation proto-col; consequently, its responses may deviate in format and omit key standardized entities, leading to poor surface overlap and strict entity matching. Notably, despite not optimizing directly for surface-level overlap, CORE-Acu also leads in BLEU-4 and ROUGE-L. This may be driven by the S-CoT structure (Section 3.1), which aligns the model’s output schema more strictly with the stan-dardized references used in the test set. Conversely, baseline models may produce verbose, paraphrased, or weakly struc-tured responses that drift from the gold standard, resulting in lower n-gram overlap scores. 

5.2. Reasoning Competence: Logical Coherence and Multidi-mensional Validity 

Given that n-gram overlap metrics are limited in capturing logical coherence and causal validity, we used GPT-5.2 as an automated judge to evaluate the 1,000 test cases along the five dimensions defined in Section 4.3, with detailed configuration provided in Table 3. Figure 3 summarizes the dimension-wise comparison with a radar chart, and Figure 4 reports the distri-bution of total scores. The radar chart highlights a critical “reasoning gap” in baseline models. Although strong general-purpose LLMs can be competitive on Prescription Rationality, they underperform more noticeably on reasoning-centric dimensions such as Di-alectical Accuracy and Pathological Logic. This pattern sug-gests that a general-purpose model may arrive at a plausible prescription without consistently deriving it from correct syn-drome di ff erentiation and a coherent pathological mechanism. Meanwhile, the medical /TCM-oriented baseline (HuatuoGPT-o1-7B) does not necessarily translate domain fluency into acupuncture-specific causal alignment, reinforcing the need for task-structured supervision. By contrast, CORE-Acu maintains high scores across all axes and is especially strong in Reason-ing Validity and Pathological Logic, indicating that S-CoT fine-tuning e ff ectively instills the intended syndrome-to-Treatment 9Reasoning         

> Dialectical
> Pathology Prescription
> Explicability
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> Evaluation on 5 Clinical Dimensions
> Qwen-Max
> Qwen3-8B
> GPT-4o
> CORE-Acu
> GLM-4.6
> HuatuoGPT-o1 Figure 3: Comparative performance across five clinical dimensions. Qwen-Max Qwen3-8B GPT-4o HuatuoGPT-o1 GLM-4.6 CORE-Acu
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> Total Score
> Distribution of Total Scores (1000 Cases)
> Figure 4: Distribution of total scores across 1,000 test cases. The com-parison includes CORE-Acu, Qwen-Max, Qwen3-8B, GPT-4o, GLM-4.6, and HuatuoGPT-o1-7B.

causal logic and improves the soundness of the decision pro-cess. The full judge prompt and scoring rubric are provided in Appendix C. 

5.3. Optimization Dynamics: Balancing Linguistic Fluency with Entity Importance 

We conduct a sensitivity analysis on the internal validation set to determine the optimal entity weight factor α for the LMERL objective. The baseline setting α = 1.0 corresponds to standard supervised fine-tuning with uniform cross-entropy. While absolute validation scores naturally exceed those on the held-out test set due to distribution shifts, the relative perfor-mance trends remain consistent, justifying the use of this set for hyperparameter selection. As presented in Table 5, setting α = 1.5 yields the optimal trade-o ff . Compared to the baseline, this configuration achieves a 3.2% relative gain in Entity-F1 (0 .5350 → 0.5521) while simultaneously improving surface-form metrics (BLEU-4 and ROUGE-L). This indicates that moderate gradient upweight-ing enhances domain entity precision without compromising linguistic fluency. Conversely, increasing α beyond 1.5 leads to performance degradation across all metrics. Specifically, at 

α = 3.0, both Entity-F1 and Entity-Recall drop significantly (0 .5034 and 0 .4806, respectively), suggesting that excessive bias toward keywords disrupts generalization and semantic co-herence. Consequently, we fix α = 1.5 for all subsequent ex-periments.   

> Table 5: Sensitivity analysis of the keyword weight factor αon the internal validation set.

α BLEU-4 ROUGE-L Entity-P Entity-R Entity-F1 

1.0 (Baseline) 0.3728 0.4452 0.5492 0.5245 0.5350 1.02 0.3715 0.4453 0.5495 0.5284 0.5368 

1.5 (Ours) 0.3879 0.4573 0.5667 0.5425 0.5521 

2.0 0.3485 0.4225 0.5430 0.4937 0.5139 3.0 0.3455 0.4206 0.5332 0.4806 0.5034 

5.4. Clinical Reasoning Evaluation: Qualitative Depth and Quantitative Validation 

To rigorously validate whether the model’s generated reason-ing traces reflect genuine clinical logic rather than stochastic mimicry, we present a dual-perspective analysis. This section reports findings from both fine-grained expert review (to assess reasoning depth and logical soundness) and large-scale auto-mated validation (to verify the generalizability of these capa-bilities). 

5.4.1. Qualitative Expert Review (Depth) 

The consensus results from expert review are summarized in Table 6. Given the intentionally small sample size ( n = 4), we do not treat this component as a hypothesis test; instead, we use it to surface concrete failure modes and to provide clinically grounded interpretations of model behavior. Table 6 reveals a pronounced mismatch between prescription-level quality and reasoning-level validity in several baselines. Memorization trap. GPT-4o achieves a perfect Prescription score (10.00), yet its Diagnosis and 

Pathology Logic scores drop to 2.00. This pattern suggests an “answer-first” behavior: the model can generate a plausible (or even correct) prescription while failing to consistently justify it through syndrome di ff erentiation and coherent pathological reasoning, which limits interpretability in clinical decision support. CORE-Acu’s reasoning alignment. In contrast, CORE-Acu exhibits a substantially more balanced profile. It improves Pathology Logic to 8.00 (vs. 2.00 for GPT-4o) and achieves the highest Explicability (10.00). These results are consistent with the intended e ff ect of S-CoT training: strength-ening the linkage between syndrome-level reasoning and the resulting acupoint prescription, thereby reducing ungrounded, black-box outputs. 

5.4.2. Quantitative Scale Validation Results 

Quantitative scoring via the LLM-as-a-Judge protocol on the 1,000 held-out cases (Table 7) confirms that CORE-Acu achieves the highest comprehensive performance among all baselines. Crucially, the model maintains substantial margins 10 Table 6: Qualitative clinical expert evaluation (consensus scores, 0–10; n = 4 complex cases). Three senior TCM practitioners assessed each model along five criteria. GPT-4o attains the highest Prescription score, whereas CORE-Acu achieves substantially stronger Pathology Logic and Explicability , indicating better alignment between clinical reasoning and the final prescription. 

Model Reasoning Diagnosis Pathology Logic Prescription Explicability CORE-Acu (Ours) 9.53 9.33 8.00 8.00 10.00 

GPT-4o 6.00 2.00 2.00 10.00 7.00 GLM-4.6 6.33 6.00 6.00 6.33 7.87 HuatuoGPT 4.00 3.00 3.33 7.00 5.67 Qwen-Max 6.00 6.00 2.00 8.00 2.00 Qwen3-8B 5.00 2.00 2.00 8.00 7.00     

> Table 7: Quantitative scale validation on 1,000 clinical cases. Scores are reported as mean ±SD over 1,000 cases using the LLM-as-a-Judge protocol (GPT-5.2). CORE-Acu attains the best overall performance and maintains consistent gains on reasoning-centric dimensions.

Model Total Score Reasoning Dialectical Pathology Logic Prescription Explicability 

GPT-4o 36.73 ± 2.49 7.54 ± 0.56 7.20 ± 0.65 7.09 ± 0.58 7.24 ± 0.63 7.66 ± 0.47 Qwen-Max 36.88 ± 2.10 7.52 ± 0.54 7.16 ± 0.58 6.99 ± 0.59 7.30 ± 0.56 7.91 ± 0.32 Qwen3-8B 29.06 ± 3.56 5.93 ± 0.79 5.75 ± 0.77 5.62 ± 0.72 5.34 ± 1.14 6.43 ± 0.59 GLM-4.6 42.26 ± 2.12 8.77 ± 0.44 8.34 ± 0.60 8.51 ± 0.62 9.04 ± 0.34 7.60 ± 0.58 HuatuoGPT 20.00 ± 3.15 3.99 ± 0.76 3.92 ± 0.67 3.77 ± 0.69 3.64 ± 0.83 4.68 ± 0.73 

CORE-Acu 42.96 ± 2.47 8.93 ± 0.59 8.28 ± 0.65 8.74 ± 0.52 8.16 ± 0.72 8.85 ± 0.55 

in Reasoning Validity (8 .93 ± 0.59) and Pathological Logic 

(8 .74 ± 0.52). This consistency across a large-scale evaluation corrobo-rates the findings of the expert review: CORE-Acu’s perfor-mance gains stem from the generation of coherent diagnos-tic chains and syndrome-grounded theoretical rationales, rather than merely superficial textual optimization. Although auto-mated scoring cannot fully replace prospective clinical trials, these results provide strong convergent evidence that the frame-work’s reasoning advantages possess robust generalization ca-pabilities, extending well beyond specific anecdotal cases. 

5.5. Safety Assurance: Enforcing Hard Constraints via Sym-bolic Verification 

To quantify safety, we report the SVR as defined in Eq. (9). Concretely, a case is counted as unsafe if the KG-based verifier returns at least one evidence triple indicating a contraindica-tion or incompatibility under the KG-encoded rule set. Vio-lations include (i) acupoint combinations explicitly prohibited by acupuncture safety rules (e.g., pregnancy-related restrictions such as Hegu + Sanyinjiao ) and (ii) condition–acupoint con-flicts triggered by patient-specific conditions extracted from the query. Figure 5 reports SVR across models. Figure 5 indicates that unconstrained foundation models may generate clinically unsafe prescriptions under KG-grounded rule-based evaluation. Despite strong linguistic fluency, GPT-4o produces contraindicated acupoint combinations in 8.5% of test cases, and Qwen-Max shows 4.1% SVR. The ad-ditional general-purpose baseline GLM-4.6 still exhibits an CORE-Acu GLM-4.6 Qwen-Max GPT-4o HuatuoGPT-o1 Qwen3-8B 0 

> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> Safety Violation Rate (%)
> 0%
> 2%
> 4.1%
> 8.5%
> 12%
> 30%
> Safety Violation Rate (SVR) across Models (Lower is Better)
> Figure 5: Safety Violation Rate across models (lower is better).

SVR of 2.0%, suggesting that scaling or alternative general pre-training alone does not reliably enforce hard acupuncture safety constraints. Notably, the medical /TCM-oriented base-line HuatuoGPT-o1-7B incurs 12.0% SVR, reinforcing that domain-fluent medical dialogue capability does not automati-cally translate into acupuncture-specific contraindication com-pliance without explicit constraint mechanisms. In contrast, CORE-Acu attains an observed SVR of 0 /1,000 on the held-out test set under the safety relations explicitly en-coded in our KG. The improvement is attributable to the KG-Constrained Inference mechanism (Section 3.4), which per-forms post-generation verification and triggers violation-aware rewriting in a bounded loop. If conflicts persist after the retry budget is exhausted, CORE-Acu returns a conservative fallback requesting human confirmation, thereby reducing the likelihood 11 of emitting prescriptions that violate KG-defined safety rules. To isolate the contribution of the symbolic safety module, we conduct an ablation study by disabling the post-hoc KG verifi-cation and rewrite loop. Evaluation is performed on 1,000 held-out test cases. Although these cases are strictly excluded from training to reduce the risk of data leakage, all entities appearing in the test set are covered by the KG ontology, so that rule-based safety constraints remain verifiable at inference time. This de-sign tests generalization to unseen patient descriptions while ensuring that safety violations, if present, are detectable under the KG-defined rule set.             

> Table 8: Ablation of KG veto (1,000 test cases).
> Method Mech. SVR (%) Repair (fix /det) FB (#)
> Qwen3-8B (base) –30.0 ––CORE-Acu (SFT) –4.0 ––
> CORE-Acu (full) veto +rw 0(0 /1,000) 100% (40 /40) 0

As shown in Table 8, the SFT-only variant (trained with the optimized keyword weight α = 1.5) reduces SVR from 30.0% (base model) to 4.0%. This indicates that fine-tuning internal-izes a substantial portion of explicit contraindication patterns. Nevertheless, the remaining 4.0% SVR is still material for high-stakes clinical settings, motivating the need for an explicit con-straint enforcement layer. Re-enabling KG-Constrained Inference (CORE-Acu full) re-duces the observed Safety Violation Rate to 0 /1,000 under our KG-encoded rule set by verifying first-pass outputs and trigger-ing bounded revisions when violations are found. Across the 1,000 cases, the verifier detected 40 violations in the first-pass generations. A violation was counted as repaired if the rewrit-ten prescription removed all KG-matched unsafe relations in 

Runsafe within Tmax = 5 attempts. Under this criterion, all de-tected violations were repaired within the retry budget (40 /40), yielding an observed SVR of 0 /1,000 on this test set. Fallback was available but not triggered on this benchmark. These re-sults suggest that the model retains su ffi cient flexibility to pro-duce alternative prescriptions when guided by symbolic nega-tive feedback. 

6. Discussion 

Based on systematic evaluations comprising automated metrics, knowledge-graph-based verification, and multi-dimensional expert adjudication, we conclude that the proposed CORE-Acu framework addresses critical challenges in high-stakes clinical decision support through three defining prop-erties: (1) Traceable auditability of clinical logic — By in-troducing an explicit S-CoT schema (symptom → diagnosis 

→ pathology → principle → prescription), CORE-Acu trans-forms implicit TCM inference into observable intermediate states. This explicit causal modeling significantly reduces the reasoning–outcome mismatch frequently observed in general-purpose LLMs, ensuring that clinical decisions are not merely probabilistic outputs but result from verifiable diagnostic logic that aligns with expert cognitive patterns. (2) Symbolic Veto Mechanism for Hard Constraint Enforcement — Unlike stan-dard probabilistic generation, our framework e ff ectively elim-inates hard constraint violations through a KG-grounded ver-ification mechanism. The implementation of a Generate– Verify–Revise inference loop provides deterministic intercept capabilities against contraindications (e.g., pregnancy prohibi-tions), utilizing bounded rewriting and conservative fallbacks to strictly maintain a zero-violation safety envelope when conflicts persist. (3) Mitigating Frequency-Importance Mismatch via LMERL — The framework addresses the intrinsic frequency– importance mismatch in medical corpus training through the LMERL. This optimization strategy adaptively up-weights gra-dients for safety-critical domain terms, successfully mitigating terminology drift and ensuring high-precision handling of acu-point names and specific syndromes without relying solely on prompt engineering. 

7. Conclusion 

In this paper, we propose CORE-Acu, a neuro-symbolic framework for acupuncture clinical decision support designed to address two critical challenges in LLM deployment: opaque reasoning and safety-critical hallucinations. We first introduce a schema-constrained S-CoT supervision paradigm to trans-form implicit TCM logic into an explicit causal chain, thereby resolving the black-box issue of clinical reasoning. To miti-gate terminology drift, we propose the LMERL objective to adaptively reweight gradients during fine-tuning, ensuring the high-fidelity generation of safety-critical entities. Finally, we implement a KG-grounded symbolic veto mechanism that en-forces deterministic contraindication rules through a Generate– Verify–Revise loop, providing the rigorous safety guarantees necessary for invasive acupuncture interventions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of CORE-Acu across three complementary evaluation mechanisms: au-tomated surface metrics, KG-grounded safety verification, and expert-level multidimensional adjudication. Results show that our framework significantly outperforms general-purpose and medical-domain baselines in both reasoning interpretability and safety compliance, achieving a zero-violation rate on the held-out test set. Despite these advancements, several challenges remain. Our current knowledge graph coverage is not exhaustive, and the binary veto mechanism may overlook nuanced, context-dependent clinical trade-o ff s. Future work will focus on ex-tending the KG to encompass a broader range of contraindi-cations, developing graded risk modeling for more flexible de-cision support, and incorporating multimodal signals—such as tongue and facial images—to enhance evidence grounding. 12 Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process 

During the preparation of this work, the author(s) used Chat-GPT in order to improve language clarity. After using this tool, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement Liuyi Xu (Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Writ-ing – original draft); Yun Guo (Investigation, Data curation, Writing – review & editing); Ming Chen (Data curation, Val-idation); Zihan Dun (Software, Visualization); An-Yang Lu 

(Resources, Funding acquisition, Validation); Shuang Li (For-mal analysis, Validation); Lijun Liu (Supervision, Funding ac-quisition, Resources); Yining Qian (Conceptualization, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – review & editing). 

Ethics approval and consent to participate 

Not applicable. All clinical records were fully de-identified prior to analysis, and no identifiable private information was accessed. In accordance with local regulations and institutional policies, ethical review and informed consent were not required for this retrospective, minimal-risk study. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing fi-nancial interests or personal relationships that could have ap-peared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Data availability 

The dataset contains sensitive patient data. We will make synthetic data available upon request. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported in part by the National Natu-ral Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant Nos. 62522309, 31871363, and 31900575, and in part by the Nat-ural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province under Grant No. 2025JH6 /101000012. 13 Appendix A. Prompts and Output Templates 

Appendix A.1. System and Instruction Template 

Table Appendix A.1 summarizes the system and instruction template used for CORE-Acu prompting. 

Table Appendix A.1: System and Instruction Template. 

Role Content System You are a TCM acupuncture expert. Follow the required output schema strictly. 

Instruction Based on the patient’s symptoms, generate a S-CoT response. Your output must be a single valid JSON object and contain no additional text. 

Appendix A.2. S-CoT JSON Output Schema 

Table Appendix A.2 defines the machine-verifiable JSON output schema (compact view). 

Table Appendix A.2: JSON Output Schema Specification (Compact View). 

1. Root Object Fields 2. Acupoint Object Fields (Nested) Key (Type) Description Key (Type) Description 

complaint (Str) Free-text symptom description. code (Str) Req. WHO code (e.g., GB20 ). No duplicates. 

diagnosis (List) TCM syndromes. Must be non-empty. name (Str) Req. Pinyin name (e.g., Fengchi ). 

pathology (Str) Pathogenesis reasoning (1–4 sentences). side (Str) Opt. Enum: { left , right , bilateral ,

unspecified }. 

principle (List) Treatment principles. Must be non-empty. role (Str) Opt. Enum: { main , assist , adjunct }. 

acupoints (List) Non-empty list of acupoint objects. (End of nested object) 

3. Global Constraints 

• Output must be valid JSON with no extra keys and no trailing text .

• The acupoints list must contain at least one item. Duplicate code entries are prohibited. 

Appendix A.3. Concrete Output Example 

Table Appendix A.3 provides a concrete S-CoT output example for readability. 14 Table Appendix A.3: A concrete S-CoT output example formatted for readability. This example demonstrates how the model explicates the specific mechanism for each acupoint selection, linking back to the diagnosis. 

Field Model Output Content Complaint Unilateral temporal (lateral) headache, migraine-like, accompanied by nausea and photophobia. 

Diagnosis • Shaoyang Headache (Migraine): Unilateral temporal pain linked to the Gallbladder channel. 

• Hyperactivity of Liver-Yang: Underlying root cause (to be di ff erentiated from Phlegm-Turbidity). 

Pathology Dysfunction of the Shaoyang pivot causing Qi stagnation; Liver Qi rebellion transforming into Fire and disturbing the clear orifices; potentially accompanied by phlegm-turbidity blocking the collaterals. 

Principle • Soothe Shaoyang: Unblock the pivot mechanism. 

• Calm Liver & Extinguish Wind: Address the root cause of rising Yang. 

• Unblock Collaterals: Relieve local pain. 

Acupoints • SJ5 (Waiguan) + GB41 (Zulinqi): [Main, Bilateral] 

Mechanism: The Shaoyang pair. SJ5 dredges the pivot mechanism and clears the head /eyes; GB41 opens the Dai Mai . Together they specifically target lateral migraines and reduce sensitivity to external stimuli. 

• LR3 (Taichong): [Main, Bilateral] 

Mechanism: Targeting the Root. Courses Liver Qi and pacifies Liver Yang to treat the underlying hyperactivity and reduce the frequency of emotional triggers. 

• GB20 (Fengchi): [Assist, Bilateral] 

Mechanism: Dispels wind and unblocks collaterals; pacifies ascending wind-fire to relieve neck tension and head distension. 

• GB8 (Shuaigu): [Assist, A ff ected Side] 

Mechanism: Local Point. Directly enters the temporal collaterals to course wind and stop pain; specifically improves throbbing sensation and photophobia. 

Table Appendix B.1: Comprehensive breakdown of automated metrics on the held-out test set. 

Model BLEU Scores ROUGE Scores Entity Metrics 

B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 R-1 R-2 R-L Prec. Rec. F1 GPT-4o 0.3470 0.1991 0.1205 0.0722 0.2753 0.0961 0.1985 0.3812 0.2368 0.2906 Qwen-Max 0.3788 0.2259 0.1401 0.0865 0.2949 0.1054 0.1988 0.3678 0.2679 0.3087 Qwen3-8B 0.3735 0.2159 0.1343 0.0814 0.2865 0.1025 0.1883 0.3182 0.2970 0.3062 GLM-4.6 0.3655 0.2061 0.1193 0.0697 0.3257 0.1137 0.1970 0.3480 0.3702 0.3511 HuatuoGPT 0.0331 0.0188 0.0107 0.0059 0.2054 0.0443 0.1209 0.4569 0.1431 0.2161 

CORE-Acu (Ours) 0.4661 0.3330 0.2471 0.1898 0.4522 0.2472 0.3334 0.5576 0.3955 0.4612      

> Note: B-1-4 : BLEU-1 to BLEU-4; R-1 /2/L: ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-L; Prec. : Precision; Rec. : Recall; F1 : Entity-F1 Score.

Table Appendix B.2: Template Specification for Violation-Aware Rewriting. 

Component Content / Specification Trigger Context Given generated acupoints A and a detected conflicting tuple ( x, r, y) where r ∈ R unsafe .

System Alert Safety Verifier Alert: Detected unsafe violation under <RULE_TYPE> .

Evidence Injection Conflict evidence: <EVIDENCE> (e.g., {SJ5, GB41} is Incompatible )

Task Instruction Your task: Revise acupoints to eliminate conflict while keeping others unchanged. 

Hard Constraints (1) Output only a valid JSON object; (2) No text outside JSON; (3) No conflicting pairs. 

Fallback Policy If unresolved within Tmax retries, terminate and request human confirmation. 

Appendix B. Detailed Experimental Results 

Appendix B.1. Comprehensive Metric Breakdown 

Table Appendix B.1 provides a consolidated report of performance. Tables Appendix B.2 and Appendix B.3 detail the rewriting template and SFT data record. 15 Table Appendix B.3: Example of a Training Instance in Alpaca Format (SFT Data Record).                

> Field Content Instruction Perform syndrome di ff erentiation using TCM acupuncture theory and provide structured S-CoT.
> Input Unilateral temporal (lateral) headache, migraine-like
> Output Target S-CoT Response:
> [complaint :] Unilateral temporal (lateral) headache, migraine-like
> [diagnosis :] Shaoyang (lateral /temporal) headache /Migraine; Hyperactivity of liver-yang (to be di ff erentiated).
> [pathology :] Dysfunction of the Shaoyang pivot, stagnation of liver and gallbladder Qi transforming into fire.
> [principle :] Soothe Shaoyang; Calm the liver and suppress yang; Unblock collaterals to relieve pain.
> [acupoints :] SJ5, GB41 :main ;GB20, GB8 :assist .

Appendix C. LLM-as-a-Judge Evaluation Protocol 

Appendix C.1. Scoring Rubric and Prompt Structure 

Table Appendix C.1 defines the five clinical evaluation dimensions (0–10 each). 

> Table Appendix C.1: Definition of the five clinical evaluation dimensions (Scale: 0–10 per dimension).

Dimension Assessment Criteria Reasoning Validity Assess if the reasoning chain is coherent and free of internal contradictions. 

Dialectical Accuracy Evaluate whether the TCM syndrome (diagnosis) is correct and reflects the precise nature /location of the condition. 

Pathological Logic Verify if the pathological mechanism explanation aligns with TCM theory. 

Prescription Rationality Assess whether selected acupoints align with therapeutic principles and include critical main points. 

Explicability Evaluate transparency, structural clarity, and professional standardization of the output. 

Table Appendix C.2 summarizes the judge prompt structure used for evaluation. 

> Table Appendix C.2: Structure of the Judge Prompt used for evaluation.

Component Content / Specification System Role You are a senior TCM acupuncture expert and professor. You need to compare the answers of multiple candidates and score each candidate based on five specific dimensions. 

Scoring Criteria (Detailed rubric as defined in Section Appendix C.1) 

Input Data The prompt receives a formatted block of answers: 

=== Candidate Answer List === {candidates_text_block} 

Output Req. 1) Compare all candidates to ensure scoring consistency; 2) Output JSON only (no Markdown); 3) Keys must match the input names exactly. 

Appendix C.2. Sample Judge Output 

Table Appendix C.3 presents a sample structured output returned by the judge LLM. 16 Table Appendix C.3: Detailed Evaluation Output from Judge LLM (Sample Case 001). Scores represent five key TCM dimensions (0–10). 

Model Reas. Dial. Path. Pres. Expl. Total Judge’s Rationale (Translated) CORE-Acu 10 9 10 9 10 48 The reasoning chain is highly coherent, accurately capturing the root-branch relationship. The combination of main points is rigorous and principles-based. GLM-4.6 9 9 9 9 8 44 Demonstrates a complete chain from etiology to treatment. Syndrome di ff er-entiation is precise, though expanded therapies are slightly generalized. GPT-4o 8 8 8 8 8 40 The di ff erentiation of phlegm-qi binding is accurate with smooth logic. The prescription aligns well, though additions appear somewhat formulaic. Qwen-Max 8 7 7 7 8 37 Overall structure is clear, but syndrome boundaries are slightly overlapping. The point significance explanation lacks depth for certain key acupoints. HuatuoGPT 6 5 5 5 6 27 Syndrome di ff erentiation is overly coarse. The prescription is brief with insuf-ficient justification for specific point selection. Qwen3-8B 4 4 4 3 5 20 Internal logic is loose. Multiple significant errors in acupoint meridian at-tributes and anatomical locations were detected. 

> Note: Reas: Reasoning; Dial: Dialectical; Path: Pathology; Pres: Prescription; Expl: Explicability.
> Table Appendix C.4: Data Schema of the Proposed Dataset

Field Key Data Type Description 

complaint String Free-text description of patient symptoms. diagnosis List[String] TCM syndrome di ff erentiation (Bian-Zheng). pathology String Mechanism explanation of the illness. principle List[String] Treatment principles guiding the prescription. acupoints List[Object] Structured acupoint prescription. Each object contains: 

• code: acupoint ID 

• name: Pinyin name 

• side: Specific side 

• role: Therapeutic role 17 References 

[1] Y. Li, et al., Large language models for electronic health records: A scoping review, arXiv, arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03066 (2024). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.03066 

[2] L. Y. Jiang, X. C. Liu, N. P. Nejatian, M. Nasir-Moin, D. Wang, A. Abidin, K. Eaton, H. A. Riina, I. Laufer, P. Punjabi, M. Miceli, N. C. Kim, C. Oril-lac, Z. Schnurman, C. Livia, H. Weiss, D. Kurland, S. Neifert, Y. Dastagirzada, D. Kondziolka, A. T. M. Cheung, G. Yang, M. Cao, M. Flores, A. B. Costa, Y. Aphinyanaphongs, K. Cho, E. K. Oermann, Health system-scale language models are all-purpose prediction engines, Nature 619 (7969) (2023) 357–362. doi:10. 1038/s41586-023-06160-y .[3] S. Azizi, A. Karthi, N. Vivian, et al., Toward expert-level medical question answering with large language models, Nature Medicine 31 (2025) 943–950. doi:10.1038/ s41591-024-03423-7 .[4] H. Nori, N. King, S. Mayer McKinney, D. Carignan, E. Horvitz, Capabilities of GPT-4 on medical challenge problems, arXiv, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13375 (2023). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13375 

[5] B. Meskó, E. J. Topol, The imperative for regulatory oversight of large language models (or generative AI) in healthcare, npj Digital Medicine 6 (2023) 120. doi: 10.1038/s41746-023-00873-0 .[6] E. Goh, R. Gallo, J. Hom, et al., Large language model influence on diagnostic reasoning: A randomized clinical trial, JAMA Network Open 7 (10) (2024) e2440969. doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.40969 .[7] P. Pandit, et al., MedHallu: A healthcare benchmark for hallucinations in large language models, arXiv, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05897 (2025). doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2503.05897 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.05897 

[8] T. Huang, L. Lu, J. Chen, L. Liu, J. He, Y. Zhao, W. Tang, J. Xu, TCM-3CEval: A triaxial benchmark for assessing responses from large language models in traditional Chi-nese medicine, arXiv, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07041 (2025). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2503.07041 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.07041 

[9] K. Singhal, S. Azizi, T. Tu, S. S. Mahdavi, J. Wei, H. W. Chung, et al., Large language models encode clinical knowledge, Nature 620 (7972) (2023) 172–180. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06291-2 .[10] H. Zhang, J. Chen, F. Jiang, F. Yu, Z. Chen, J. Li, G. Chen, X. Wu, Z. Zhang, Q. Qing, et al., Hu-atuoGPT: Toward taming language model to be a doc-tor, arXiv, arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15075 (2023). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.15075 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15075 

[11] S. Yang, H. Zhao, S. Zhu, G. Zhou, H. Xu, Y. Jia, H. Zan, Zhongjing: Enhancing the Chinese medical capabilities of large language model through expert feedback and real-world multi-turn dialogue, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 38, 2024, pp. 19368–19376. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/ article/view/29907 

[12] S. Wei, X. Peng, Y.-F. Wang, T. Shen, J. Si, W. Zhang, F. Zhu, A. V. Vasilakos, W. Lu, X. Wu, Y. Wang, Bian-Cang: A traditional Chinese medicine large language model, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informat-ics (2025) 1–12 doi:10.1109/JBHI.2025.3612415 .[13] Z. Cheng, Y. Lu, H. Ye, Z. Liu, M. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Li, W. Fan, Y. Guo, R. Fu, S. She, G. Wang, Y. Wang, TCM-Eval: An expert-level dynamic and ex-tensible benchmark for traditional Chinese medicine, arXiv, arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.07148 (2025). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2511.07148 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.07148 

[14] Y. Li, X. Peng, S. Peng, J. Li, D. Pei, Q. Zhang, Y. Hu, F. Li, L. Zhou, C. Tao, H. Xu, N. Hong, AcuKG: A comprehensive knowledge graph for medical acupuncture, medRxiv, preprint (2025). 

doi:10.1101/2025.03.22.25324466 .URL https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10. 1101/2025.03.22.25324466v1 

[15] J. He, Y. Guo, L. K. Lam, W. Leung, L. He, Y. Jiang, C. C. Wang, G. Xing, H. Chen, OpenTCM: A GraphRAG-empowered LLM-based system for traditional Chinese medicine knowledge retrieval and diagnosis, arXiv, arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20118 (2025). doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2504.20118 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20118 

[16] N. Houlsby, A. Giurgiu, S. Jastrzebski, B. Morrone, Q. De Laroussilhe, A. Gesmundo, M. Attariyan, S. Gelly, Parameter-e ffi cient transfer learning for NLP, in: Pro-ceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Vol. 97, PMLR, 2019, pp. 2790–2799. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/ houlsby19a.html 

[17] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, W. Chen, Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models (2021). arXiv:2106.09685 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685 

[18] T. Dettmers, A. Pagnoni, A. Holtzman, L. Zettlemoyer, QLoRA: E ffi cient finetuning of quantized LLMs, arXiv, arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14314 (2023). doi:10. 48550/arXiv.2305.14314 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14314 

18 [19] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, P. Dollár, Fo-cal loss for dense object detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017, pp. 2980–2988. doi:10.1109/ICCV. 2017.324 .[20] Y. Cui, M. Jia, T.-Y. Lin, Y. Song, S. Belongie, Class-balanced loss based on e ff ective number of samples, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019, pp. 9260– 9269. doi:10.1109/CVPR.2019.00949 .[21] A. Piñeiro-Martín, C. García-Mateo, L. Docío-Fernández, M. d. C. López-Pérez, G. Rehm, Weighted cross-entropy for low-resource languages in multilingual speech recog-nition, arXiv, arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16954 (2024). 

doi:10.48550/arXiv.2409.16954 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.16954 

[22] A. Gandhe, F. Metze, A. Waibel, I. Lane, Optimization of neural network language models for keyword search, in: 2014 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, 2014, pp. 4888–4892. doi:10.1109/ICASSP.2014.6854531 .[23] C. Y. Kwok, J. Q. Yip, E. S. Chng, Improving syn-thetic data training for contextual biasing models with a keyword-aware cost function, in: Interspeech 2025, 2025, pp. 3888–3892. doi:10.21437/Interspeech. 2025-173 .[24] Z. Zhang, Y. Gu, B. Plummer, Show, write, and retrieve: Entity-aware article generation and retrieval, in: Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, Association for Computational Linguis-tics, Singapore, 2023, pp. 8684–8704. doi:10.18653/ v1/2023.findings-emnlp.581 .[25] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, W.-J. Zhu, BLEU: A method for automatic evaluation of machine translation, in: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics, 2002, pp. 311–318. 

doi:10.3115/1073083.1073135 .URL https://aclanthology.org/P02-1040/ 

[26] C.-Y. Lin, ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries, in: Text Summarization Branches Out, 2004, pp. 74–81. URL https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013 

[27] Y. Li, Z. Li, K. Zhang, R. Dan, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Chat-Doctor: A medical chat model fine-tuned on LLaMA us-ing medical domain knowledge, Cureus (2023). doi: 10.7759/cureus.40895 .URL https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.40895 

[28] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li, E. P. Xing, et al., Judging llm-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and chatbot arena, arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685 (2023). [29] Y. Liu, D. Iter, Y. Xu, S. Wang, R. Xu, C. Zhu, G-Eval: NLG evaluation using GPT-4 with bet-ter human alignment, in: Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023, pp. 2511–2522. 

doi:10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.153 .URL https://aclanthology.org/2023. emnlp-main.153/ 

[30] H. Wang, S. Zhao, Z. Qiang, Z. Li, C. Liu, N. Xi, Y. Du, B. Qin, T. Liu, Knowledge-tuning large language mod-els with structured medical knowledge bases for trustwor-thy response generation in Chinese, ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data 19 (2) (2025) 1–17. 

doi:10.1145/3686807 .[31] W. Shi, X. Han, M. Lewis, Y. Tsvetkov, L. Zettlemoyer, W.-t. Yih, Trusting your evidence: Hallucinate less with context-aware decoding, in: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 2: Short Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024, pp. 783–791. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-short.69 .URL https://aclanthology.org/2024. naacl-short.69/ 

[32] N. F. Liu, K. Lin, J. Hewitt, A. Paranjape, M. Bevilac-qua, F. Petroni, P. Liang, Lost in the middle: How lan-guage models use long contexts, arXiv, arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03172 (2023). doi:10.48550/arXiv. 2307.03172 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03172 

[33] A. Madaan, N. Tandon, P. Gupta, S. Hallinan, L. Gao, S. Wiegre ff e, A. Alon, A. Yazdanbakhsh, X. Pan, Y. Zhou, et al., Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback (2023). arXiv:2303.17651 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17651 

[34] L. Gao, Z. Dai, P. Pasupat, RARR: Researching and re-vising what language models say, using language models, in: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2023, pp. 16477–16508. doi:10.18653/v1/ 2023.acl-long.910 .URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long. 910/ 

19