Title: Emotion Transcription in Conversation: A Benchmark for Capturing Subtle and Complex Emotional States through Natural Language

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.07138v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 00:39:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Emotion Transcription in Conversation: A Benchmark for Capturing Subtle and Complex Emotional States through Natural Language 

## Yoshiki Tanaka 1, Ryuichi Uehara 1, Koji Inoue 2, Michimasa Inaba 1

1The University of Electro-Communications, Tokyo, Japan 2Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan {y-tanaka,r-uehara,m-inaba}@uec.ac.jp inoue.koji.3x@kyoto-u.ac.jp 

Abstract 

Emotion Recognition in Conversation (ERC) is critical for enabling natural human-machine interactions. However, existing methods predominantly employ categorical or dimensional emotion annotations, which often fail to ade-quately represent complex, subtle, or culturally specific emotional nuances. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel task named Emotion Transcription in Conversation (ETC). This task focuses on generating natural language descriptions that accurately reflect speakers’ emotional states within conversational contexts. To address the ETC, we constructed a Japanese dataset comprising text-based dialogues annotated with participants’ self-reported emotional states, described in natural language. The dataset also includes emotion category labels for each transcription, enabling quantitative analysis and its application to ERC. We benchmarked baseline models, finding that while fine-tuning on our dataset enhances model performance, current models still struggle to infer implicit emotional states. The ETC task will encourage further research into more expressive emotion understanding in dialogue. The dataset is publicly available at https://github.com/UEC-InabaLab/ETCDataset .

Keywords: Emotion Transcription in Conversation, Emotion Recognition in Conversation, Corpus Construc-tion, Dialogue 

## 1. Introduction 

Emotion Recognition in Conversation (ERC) is a critical technology for enabling natural and seam-less human-machine interactions, and its signifi-cance has grown substantially in recent years (Po-ria et al., 2019; Pereira et al., 2025). Accu-rately comprehending user emotions is indispens-able for developing more empathetic and human-like conversational systems. Research in this do-main has advanced dramatically over the past decade, with the advent of deep learning and large-scale language models propelling recognition ac-curacy toward practical application levels (Fu et al., 2025; Pereira et al., 2025). Numerous benchmark datasets have been established (Busso et al., 2008; Li et al., 2017; Poria et al., 2019), and emo-tion classification algorithms have evolved from traditional machine learning to sophisticated deep learning architectures. However, a prevalent limi-tation persists: dialogue data predominantly used in existing research often relies on specific sce-narios or includes posed emotional expressions, which do not always reflect spontaneous, every-day conversations (Busso et al., 2008; Poria et al., 2019). Consequently, this presents a consider-able challenge for conversational systems and robots designed for diverse real-world applica-tions. Addressing this gap, we propose a novel task for emotion recognition: “Emotion Transcription in Conversation (ETC).” Unlike conventional ERC ap-I feel like you can't really build relationships without trust, but you get betrayed sometimes. It's complicated, isn't it? I worried this deep question might make them uncomfortable, but I wanted to ask to get to know them better. I deeply empathized with the complexity of relationships and wanted to express that we need to approach them sincerely and build trust. Relationships arereally hard, aren't they? What you think is helpful can bother someone, (…) There's no right answer —you just fi gure it out as you go. I totally agree with you. I've also had an experience where people misunderstood my intentions and unfairly blamed me. I was glad they responded as if it were their own experience. I empathized with their experience and felt sympathy for how unfair one-sided blame is. That sounds like a very painful experience. When someone blames you unfairly, they won't listen even when you reach out, making it harder to build trust. Thank you. Yeah, it was my boss, a man in his 50s. Our thinking was just fundamentally different, so I distanced myself from him. I was glad to receive their kind words about my painful experience. Utterance Emotion Transcription …

Figure 1: Example of a dialogue with emotion transcriptions from our dataset (translated from Japanese). Each transcription is also annotated with multi-label emotion categories. proaches, ETC aims to generate natural language descriptions of a speaker’s emotional state for each utterance within a conversation. By capturing emotions through natural language, we anticipate the ability to represent richer and more detailed af-fective information that eludes traditional categor-ical or numerical frameworks. This includes sub-

> arXiv:2603.07138v1 [cs.CL] 7 Mar 2026

tle emotional shifts, blended emotions, and cul-turally specific expressions of feeling, which has been attempted by soft label of emotional cate-gories so far (Wen et al., 2023). For instance, com-plex states such as “a sense of exasperation mixed with concern for the other person” or “disappoint-ment at an unmet expectation while trying to main-tain composure” are difficult to articulate within ex-isting paradigms. Describing emotions in natural language opens a new avenue for machines to understand and articulate the inherent richness of human affective states. Although there has been a limited number of attempts to represent emo-tional states of dialogue participants in natural lan-guage (Shinoda et al., 2025), those were artificially generated by LLMs. This formulation is particularly exigent in the current era of rapidly advancing LLM capabilities, offering the potential for machines to more accurately grasp the depths of human emo-tion and thereby foster genuinely empathetic inter-actions. To realize the proposed ETC task, our initial un-dertaking involves the meticulous collection of a suitable dataset and the establishment of a robust benchmark. Specifically, we leverage crowdsourc-ing to collect text-based dialogues in Japanese that simulate a variety of everyday scenarios. Cru-cially, during this process, dialogue participants will be prompted to describe their own emotional state at each turn of the conversation using free-form natural language, as depicted in Figure 1. Furthermore, to enable quantitative analysis and its application to ERC, we collect emotion category labels corresponding to each transcription. This methodology yields a large-scale dataset compris-ing pairs of naturalistic emotional expressions and their corresponding linguistic descriptions. Sub-sequently, using this curated dataset, we develop and evaluate models designed to generate these emotional state descriptions from dialogue context. This empirical validation ascertains the feasibility of the ETC task and the efficacy of our proposed approach. The primary contributions of this research are threefold: (1) We introduce “Emotion Transcrip-tion in Conversation (ETC)” as a new task in con-versational emotion recognition, enabling a more nuanced and detailed understanding of emotions beyond what is possible with existing categorical or dimensional approaches. This represents a paradigm shift in how machines can interpret and represent affective states. (2) We construct and release a novel dialogue dataset annotated with speakers’ own natural language descriptions of their emotions. This dataset will serve as a valu-able resource for the research community, partic-ularly for studies aiming to achieve more human-like emotional understanding in AI. (3) We de-velop baseline models for the ETC task using this dataset and empirically demonstrate their effec-tiveness. In doing so, this research charts a new direction for emotion recognition technology and contributes to the advancement of emotional in-telligence in future conversational systems and robotics, paving the way for more sophisticated and empathetic human-AI collaboration. 

## 2. Related Work 

ERC has garnered significant attention within Nat-ural Language Processing (NLP), driven by the exponential increase in recognition models with benchmark datasets. 

Recognition Models Pre-trained language models (PLMs), such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), have become foundational in text-based ERC due to their powerful contextual understanding. Many approaches fine-tune these PLMs on specific ERC datasets, often augmenting them with additional layers to integrate conversational features like speaker identities and dialogue history (Qin et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2024). Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have also gained prominence in modeling intricate conversational dynamics, particularly speaker interactions and utterance dependencies. Notable examples include DialogueGCN (Ghosal et al., 2019), which represents conversations as graphs with utterances as nodes and interrelations as edges. Additionally, models like ESIHGNN have introduced event-state interactions within heterogeneous GNN frameworks to enhance ERC performance (Zha et al., 2024). Large Language Models (LLMs) have further advanced ERC through diverse prompting strategies, such as zero-shot, few-shot, and chain-of-thought prompt-ing, as well as targeted LoRA fine-tuning (Feng et al., 2024). Recent studies like LaERC-S specif-ically explore enhancing LLM-based ERC through explicit integration of speaker characteristics (Fu et al., 2025). 

Datasets and Emotion Categories Several benchmark datasets have been developed to ad-vance ERC research, often employing discrete emotion categories. MELD (Multimodal Emo-tionLines Dataset), derived from the “Friends” TV series, captures multi-party interactions an-notated with Ekman’s six basic emotions and neutral, making it widely used for studying emo-tional shifts in conversational contexts (Poria et al., 2019). The IEMOCAP (Interactive Emo-tional Dyadic Motion Capture Database) dataset provides dyadic interactions with both scripted and improvised dialogues, supplemented by mul-timodal data, and features custom emotional la-bels such as anger, happiness/excitement, neu-tral, and sadness (Busso et al., 2008). MSP-Conversation (Martinez-Lucas et al., 2020) and MSP-Podcast (Busso et al., 2025) are audio-based corpora sourced from podcast recordings. MSP-Conversation provides time-continuous an-notations of emotional dimensions (arousal, va-lence, and dominance) over entire conversations, while MSP-Podcast offers segment-level anno-tations with categorical emotion labels. MSP-Podcast also utilizes typed descriptions as supple-mentary annotations from annotators when they select the “other” emotion category, allowing an-notators to specify emotions beyond predefined categories (Chou et al., 2022). DailyDialog offers cleaner, human-generated dyadic dialogues anno-tated with Ekman’s basic emotions and includes communicative intent labels (Li et al., 2017). Emo-tionLines, also based on “Friends,” is a text-only predecessor of MELD (Hsu et al., 2018). Similarly, EmoryNLP, although also drawn from “Friends,” provides distinct data splits and annotations (Zahiri and Choi, 2018). EmoContext focuses on short, three-turn dialogues with simplified emotion cate-gories (happiness, sadness, anger, others) (Chat-terjee et al., 2019). CAPE, a Chinese appraisal-based emotional dataset, specifically targets emo-tional generation in LLMs (Liu et al., 2025). While some attempts have been made to represent di-alogue participants’ emotional states explicitly in natural language, similar to our ETC task, these ef-forts primarily relied on artificially generated data from LLMs (Shinoda et al., 2025). 

## 3. Data Collection 

3.1. Procedure 

We used CrowdWorks 1, a Japanese crowdsourc-ing platform, for this data collection. To character-ize our participant pool, we measured the Big Five personality traits of all crowdworkers using a 10-item questionnaire based on the Japanese version of the Ten-Item Personality Inventory (TIPI-J) (Os-hio et al., 2012). To effectively elicit rich and natu-rally occurring emotional expressions, we adopted a speaker-listener dialogue setting inspired by the EmpatheticDialogue paradigm (Rashkin et al., 2019). Crowdworkers were assigned one of two roles: a “Speaker” or a “Listener.” The core task for the Speaker was to recount a personal episode related to a specific emotion. To guide this, Speak-ers were provided with one of 32 emotion labels, which were Japanese translations of the emotions used in the EmpatheticDialogue corpus (Rashkin         

> 1https://crowdworks.jp Dialogues 1,002 Utterances / Emotion Transcripts 10,020 Avg. Length per Utterance 42.72 by Speaker 44.64 by Listener 40.80 Avg. Length per Emotion Transcripts 28.89 by Speaker 28.92 by Listener 28.86

Table 1: Statistics of the Dataset et al., 2019). They were instructed to convey, through dialogue, a concrete personal experience where they felt the designated emotion. Listeners, in turn, were tasked with actively engaging with the Speaker’s narrative. Dialogues were structured to begin with an utterance from the Speaker, followed by alternating turns between the Speaker and Lis-tener. Each dialogue concluded after 5 turns, re-sulting in a total of 10 utterances. Immediately after inputting each of their utterances, both the Speaker and the Listener were required to provide a free-form textual description of their own inter-nal emotional state at that specific moment of ut-tering the text. We defined this emotional state description as “a verbalization of the internal emo-tional state or intention a participant held at the time of their utterance.” Crowdworkers were ex-plicitly guided to describe, in as much detail as possible, the psychological context behind their ut-terance. Further details on the data collection are provided in Appendix A. 

3.2. Data Collection Results 

We collected a total of 1,002 dialogues. An exam-ple of collected data is presented in Figure 1. Atotal of 199 unique crowdworkers participated in the data collection. The distribution of personality traits among participants is provided in Appendix B for reference. The median number of dialogues per worker was 6.0, with the most active worker contributing to 38 dialogues. We aimed for an even distribution of dialogues across the 32 emotion la-bels; the number of dialogues per emotion ranged from a minimum of 30 to a maximum of 32. Table 1 shows key statistics of the collected dataset. On average, Speakers’ utterances were slightly longer (in characters) than those of Listen-ers, while the lengths of emotional transcriptions were comparable across both roles. 

3.3. Annotation for Emotion Categorization 

While the emotion transcriptions we collected con-tain fine-grained details of the speakers’ emotional states, they are challenging to analyze quantita-tively. To address this, we additionally annotated each emotion transcription in our dataset with cor-responding emotion labels. This annotation not only enables a quantitative analysis of the emo-tions expressed in the transcriptions but also al-lows our dataset to be applied to traditional ERC tasks. We adopted a set of seven emotion categories, comprising the six basic emotions from Ekman’s six universal emotions (Ekman et al., 1987) ̶ joy, sadness, fear, anger, surprise, and disgust ( 喜び ,

悲しみ , 恐怖 , 怒り , 驚き , 嫌悪 )̶ supplemented with a “neutral” ( 該 当 な し ) category. This set is widely used in established ERC datasets (Hsu et al., 2018; Poria et al., 2019; Li et al., 2017). To account for the possibility that a single emo-tion transcription may express multiple emotions, we employed a multi-label annotation approach. Specifically, annotators assigned all relevant la-bels to each emotion transcription. “Neutral” was used only for transcriptions that did not express any specific emotion. Each emotion transcription was annotated by three different annotators on CrowdWorks. An-notators were provided with the full dialogue con-text and the corresponding emotion transcription, and made a binary answer on whether each of the seven emotion categories was present in the tran-scription. Following previous studies (Busso et al., 2008; Hsu et al., 2018), we used majority voting to aggregate the results; an emotion category was assigned as the final label if two or more of the three annotators agreed on it. If none of the emo-tion categories were agreed upon, the transcrip-tion was labeled as “Neutral” only. 

## 4. Experiments 

To evaluate the utility of our dataset for the ETC task, we trained baseline models and assessed their performance. We divided our dataset into training, validation, and test sets in an 8:1:1 ratio. 

4.1. Task 

The ETC task requires models to generate natural language descriptions reflecting a speaker’s emo-tional state. To evaluate this ability, we formulate the ETC as follows. Each dialogue D in our dataset consists of 

N = 10 utterances and is represented as a se-quence of utterance-speaker pairs, denoted as 

D = (( u1, s 1), (u2, s 2), . . . , (uN , s N )) , where ui

denotes the i-th utterance and si represents its speaker. In the ETC task, the model M is given the dialogue context Cn up to the n-th utterance, denoted as Cn = (( u1, s 1), (u2, s 2), . . . , (un, s n)) ,where n can be any utterance in the dialogue (i.e., 

1 ≤ n ≤ N ). The objective of this task is to predict the emotion transcription en for an utter-ance un made by speaker sn based on Cn. i.e., 

en = M(Cn). Here, the emotion transcription en

is a natural language description of the emotional state of speaker sn at the time of uttering un.

4.2. Models 

We investigated the performance of two LLMs: 

GPT-4.1 2, the latest advanced chat model devel-oped by OpenAI, and Llama-3.1-Swallow 3 (Fu-jii et al., 2024; Okazaki et al., 2024) , an open-source LLM known for its strong proficiency in Japanese. Both LLMs were evaluated using zero-shot and 4-shot prompting. The prompt template we designed for this experiment is presented in Ap-pendix C. Additionally, we performed supervised fine-tuning on Llama-3.1 with our dataset. For the fine-tuned Llama-3.1, we report the average per-formance across models trained with five random seeds to ensure robustness. Further implementa-tion details are provided in Appendix D. 

4.3. Evaluation Metrics 

4.3.1. Traditional Automatic Evaluation Metrics 

To evaluate the quality of the emotion transcrip-tions, we use two traditional automatic evalua-tion metrics: BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and ROUGE (Lin, 2004), and a semantic similarity met-ric: BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020). 

4.3.2. Fine-grained and Interpretable Evaluation of Content Faithfulness 

Recent studies have proposed using LLMs as au-tomatic evaluators to approximate human prefer-ences more closely (Zheng et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). Following this trend, we initially explored a LLM-based evaluation metric to assess the se-mantic alignment between the generated emotion transcriptions and the ground truth. However, relying on a single, holistic score presents significant challenges for our task. The emotional states are often complex, containing multiple components, such as “ feeling angry that my feelings are not understood, but also sad. ” For such complex expressions, a single score strug-gles to accurately penalize the omission of some emotional components or the hallucination of oth-ers. To address this gap, we introduce a fine-grained evaluation approach of content faithful-ness. This method, inspired by FActScore (Min et al., 2023) is based on two steps.                                                                     

> 2We used gpt-4.1-2025-04-14.
> 3We used Llama-3.1-Swallow-8B-Instruct-v0.3. Models Setting B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 R-1 R-2 R-L BS Prec. Rec. F1
> GPT-4.1 zero-shot 16.89 7.99 3.93 2.09 23.61 4.87 17.93 57.66 14.73 42.27 13.99 4-shot 26.89 13.34 7.36 4.12 28.06 5.78 22.98 59.67 20.59 27.40 13.78 Llama-3.1 zero-shot 17.40 7.20 3.55 1.84 20.25 3.08 16.26 55.24 9.18 17.98 5.77 4-shot 29.41 14.86 8.46 4.84 27.51 5.58 23.22 59.95 14.83 14.18 7.84 fine-tuning 36.07 23.01 15.59 9.98 31.95 8.79 28.54 62.64 28.50 19.71 14.29

Table 2: Automatic evaluation results for ETC task. Reported metrics include BLEU (B), ROUGE (R), BERTScore (BS), Precision (Prec.), Recall (Rec.), and F1-score (F1). Best values are in bold , and the second-best values in underlined.           

> Model Setting # Units (SD)
> GPT-4.1 zero-shot 3.39 (1.14) 4-shot 1.96 (0.76) Llama-3.1 zero-shot 1.99 (1.04) 4-shot 1.58 (0.58) fine-tuning 1.39 (0.60) Reference –1.35 (0.64)

Table 3: Average number of atomic units decom-posed from the predicted transcription and from the ground truth (Reference). 

Decomposition into Atomic Units . First, the source emotion transcription is decomposed into atomic units, each conveying a single piece of in-formation about the emotional state. For example, 

feeling angry that my feelings are not understood, but also sad. ” is split into two units: I am angry that my feelings are not understood ” and “ I am sad that my feelings are not understood .” Note that some input texts may not contain any emotional descrip-tion. We used Gemini-2.5-Flash 4 for this step. 

Assessing Support for Atomic Units . Next, we classify whether each atomic unit from the source transcription is supported by the target emotion transcription into three categories: Supported ,

Not Supported , and Neutral . For example, the unit “I am angry that my feelings are not under-stood” is supported by the target “feeling angry that my feelings are not understood, but also sad.” and is thus classified as Supported . In contrast, the unit “I am happy that my feelings are understood” is not supported by the target and is classified as 

Not Supported . The Neutral applies when a core component matches, but the validity of a sec-ondary component is uncertain. For instance, rela-tive to the target “I am angry,” the unit “I am angry that my feelings are not understood” is classified as Neutral because the core emotion (“angry”) matches, but the reason (“that my feelings are not understood”) cannot be verified. This classification step was performed using Gemini-2.5-Flash. The 

> 4https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/ docs/models

prompts used in the above two steps are presented in Appendix E. Following these two steps, we compute two scores for each predicted emotion transcription. 

Precision . We decomposed the predicted emo-tion transcription into atomic units in the first step and calculated the proportion of these units that are Supported by the ground truth transcription. 

Recall . We decomposed the ground truth emotion transcription into atomic units and calculated the proportion of these units that are Supported by the predicted emotion transcription. For both metrics, units classified as Neutral 

are not counted as correct in the calculation. We exclude cases where the ground-truth transcrip-tion does not describe any emotional state in our evaluation, as the above scores are undefined in such cases. If the generated transcription con-tains no emotional description, but the ground truth does, we set both scores to 0. Additionally, we cal-culate the F1-score , the harmonic mean of Preci-sion and Recall, as an overall measure of perfor-mance. 

4.4. Results 

Table 2 presents the results of automatic evalu-ation for the ETC task. For widely used, tradi-tional metrics ̶ BLEU, ROUGE, and BERTScore ̶

the fine-tuned Llama-3.1 model outperformed the other models by a significant margin. In terms of Precision, the Llama-3.1 model fine-tuned on our dataset achieves the highest score of 28.50%. For this metric, the 4-shot setting con-sistently outperforms the zero-shot setting, align-ing with the trend observed in traditional automatic evaluation metrics. Recall, however, exhibits an opposite trend. The zero-shot setting yields higher scores than the 4-shot setting for both models, with the zero-shot GPT-4.1 achieving the highest Recall of 42.27% ̶ significantly outperforming all other models. Finally, for the F1-score, the fine-tuned Llama-3.1 model secures the best result at 14.29%. Nevertheless, GPT-4.1 remains highly competitive, with its zero-shot setting achieving a close score of 13.99%. Context Speaker A : The other day, I was driving at night when a cyclist with no lights suddenly shot out in front of me... It was terrifying. ( この間、夜に車を運転していたら無灯火の自転車が飛び出してきて…本当 に怖い思いをしました。 ) 

> Speaker B : That sounds so scary. An experience like that could take years off your life. ( 想像するだ けで怖いです。寿命が縮みそうな出来事でしたね。 )
> Speaker A : I thought my heart was going to stop. I was relieved we didn’t crash, but afterward, I just got so angry. ( 心臓が止まりそうでしたよ、事故にならなくてほっとしましたが、あとから怒りが湧 いてきましたね。 )
> Output Ground-Truth : I was happy that the dialogue partner understood my feelings, and I wanted to share my feelings even more. ( 相手が心情を理解してくれたことが嬉しく、気持ちをもっときょうゆうし たくなりました。 )
> GPT-4.1 (zero-shot) : I’m feeling a mix of fear from the truly dangerous situation I was in, relief that it didn’t turn into an accident, and anger that is now welling up toward the cyclist who shot out without lights. I’m speaking with the hope that the dialogue partner understands my shock and anger from that moment. ( 自分が本当に危険な目にあったことへの恐怖と、事故にならずに済んだ安堵感、そし て無灯火で飛び出してきた自転車に対して後から怒りがこみ上げてきた気持ちが混ざっている。相 手にもそのときの自分の動揺や怒りを理解してほしいと思いながら話している。 )
> GPT-4.1 (4-shot) : I wanted the dialogue partner to understand my feelings of fear and anger. ( 相手に 自分の恐怖や怒りの気持ちを理解してもらいたかったです。 )
> Llama-3.1 (zero-shot) : I was really scared, and I also feel angry. ( 本当に怖かったし、怒りも感じて います。 )
> Llama-3.1 (4-shot) : I want the dialogue partner to understand my fear and anger. ( 相手に自分の恐怖 と怒りを理解してもらいたいと思っています。 )
> Llama-3.1 (fine-tuned) : I was happy for their empathy and wanted them to hear more details. ( 相手 の共感に嬉しく思い、さらに詳しく話を聞いてもらいたいと思いました。 )

Table 4: Case study of emotion transcription generation. (translated from Japanese) The outputs are the emotion transcriptions for Speaker A’s final utterance. The fine-grained evaluation of content faithful-ness reveals the distinct characteristics of each model. We present the average number of atomic units decomposed from the generated transcrip-tion and from the ground truth in Table 3. The fine-tuned Llama-3.1 model generates transcriptions with an average atomic unit of 1.39, which is clos-est to the ground truth of 1.35 among all models. In contrast, models in the zero-shot setting, par-ticularly the GPT variants, tend to generate higher numbers of atomic units per transcription. The trends observed in the information content explain the Precision-Recall trade-off. Transcrip-tions with a higher number of atomic units, such as those from the zero-shot models, are more likely to cover the atomic units present in the ground truth, thereby enhancing their Recall scores. Con-versely, this verbosity increases the likelihood of including redundant information, which negatively impacts their Precision. In contrast, the fine-tuned Llama-3.1 model’s output quantity (1.39 units) not only aligns closely with the ground truth (1.35) but also achieves the highest Precision. This suggests that fine-tuning helped the model accurately iden-tify the speaker’s emotional state. Moreover, the ETC task remains challenging, as evidenced by the overall low scores across all eval-uation metrics. Even the best-performing model, the fine-tuned Llama-3.1, achieves only 14.29% in F1-score, indicating significant room for improve-ment in accurately capturing speakers’ emotional states in dialogues. Additionally, lower F1 scores than both Precision and Recall for all models suggest a notable imbalance between these two aspects, highlighting the difficulty of generating emotion transcriptions that are both comprehen-sive and precise. Bridging this gap positions our dataset as a valuable and challenging benchmark for the community, advancing future research on understanding emotional states. 

## 5. Case Study 

To illustrate the challenges faced by current ETC models, we present a case study in Table 4. In this example, Speaker A’s final utterance explicitly mentions feelings of relief and anger related to a past event. The ground-truth transcription, how-ever, reveals that the speaker’s actual emotional state at that moment was happiness, stemming from the listener’s empathetic response. This gap between the narrated emotions and the speaker’s actual emotional state poses a significant chal-lenge for the ETC task. Faced with this challenge, most models failed to capture the speaker’s true emotional state. As shown in Table 4, the outputs from GPT-4.1 and the zero-shot and 4-shot Llama-3.1 models fo-cused only on the negative emotions explicitly mentioned in the narrative. For example, the generation from GPT-4.1 in the zero-shot setting, which is the most lengthy, not only identified the emotions present in the utterance but also elabo-rated on them to express a desire for the listener’s understanding. However, it still failed to predict the emergent feeling of happiness. In contrast, the Llama-3.1 model, fine-tuned on our dataset, suc-cessfully inferred the speaker’s happiness derived from the empathetic interaction with the listener, suggesting that our dataset provides valuable train-ing signals for capturing nuanced emotional states in dialogues. 

## 6. Corpus Analysis 

The annotated emotion labels enable a structured analysis of our dataset, providing insights into the characteristics of the emotion transcriptions. In this section, we present a quantitative analysis of the annotated emotion labels, focusing on three aspects: the distribution and agreement of the la-bels (Section 6.1), the co-occurrence of emotion labels within utterances (Section 6.2), and the tex-tual differences between utterances and emotion transcriptions (Section 6.3). 

6.1. Label Distribution and Agreement 

We first analyze the distribution of emotion labels assigned to the emotion transcriptions, a process detailed in Section 3.3. Table 5 presents their distribution, showing the prevalence of each la-bel for Speakers, Listeners, and all participants. In this analysis, prevalence is calculated as the proportion of transcriptions assigned a given la-bel through majority voting. The table also reports the overall inter-annotator agreement, measured by Fleiss’ kappa (Fleiss, 1971). Overall, approximately 50% of the emotion tran-scriptions were labeled as “Neutral,” indicating that nearly half of the transcriptions expressed one or more emotions other than neutral. Among the emotion labels, “Joy” was the most frequently ex-pressed. When analyzed by role, Speakers’ tran-scriptions have a higher proportion of emotion labels assigned compared to those of Listeners. This difference is likely to be attributed to the task instructions for each role. Speakers were explicitly instructed to talk about the topic related to a spe-cific emotion, a prompt that naturally encouraged more emotional expression and recall, compared to the Listeners. Interestingly, “Surprise” was the only emotion label expressed more frequently in the Listener’s transcriptions than in the Speaker’s                                     

> Emotion Spk. (%) Lsn. (%) All (%) κ
> Joy 29.9 20.0 25.0 0.603 Sadness 10.8 8.8 9.8 0.359 Fear 7.1 5.3 6.2 0.476 Anger 3.7 2.8 3.2 0.529 Surprise 2.4 4.7 3.5 0.560 Disgust 6.3 3.3 4.8 0.233 Neutral 43.4 57.2 50.3 0.400 Overall –––0.533

Table 5: Distribution of emotion labels in emotion transcriptions by dialogue role and inter-annotator agreement (Fleiss’ kappa). Columns denote di-alogue role: speaker (Spk.), listener (Lsn.), and both roles (All). 

Figure 2: Co-occurrence matrix of emotion labels. Each cell indicates the number of transcriptions an-notated with both corresponding labels. (4.7% vs. 2.4%). Surprise is an emotion often experienced as a reaction to an event or new in-formation. For example, our dataset contains sev-eral Listener transcriptions expressing surprise in response to the Speaker’s narrative, such as “ It was somewhat unexpected, so I tried to imagine the situation myself. ” and “ I was surprised that something like this could really happen. ”, thereby illustrating this trend. The overall inter-annotator agreement of Fleiss’ kappa is 0.533, indicating moderate agree-ment. Examining emotion labels individually, “joy” showed the highest agreement among annota-tors, followed by “anger” ( κ = 0.529 ) and “sur-prise.” ( κ = 0 .560 ) Conversely, “disgust” exhibited the lowest agreement ( κ = 0 .233 ). 

6.2. Co-occurrence of Emotion Labels 

In this section, we analyze the co-occurrence of emotion labels in the emotion transcriptions to un-derstand the complexity of emotional expression. Figure 2 illustrates the co-occurrence relationships of emotion labels within the transcriptions. We found that approximately 5.6% of all non-neutral transcriptions contained multiple emotion labels. A closer look at the co-occurrence matrix in Fig-ure 2 reveals several patterns. First, emotions with Emotion Utterance Emotion transcription Joy くださる (give), 楽しみだ (excited), 感動 (moved),                                                                                                                     

> 食べる (eat), 楽しむ (enjoy)
> うれしい (happy), ワクワク (excited), 前向きだ
> (positive), 感動 (moved), 楽しみだ (excited)
> Sadness 悲しい (sad), 寂しい (lonely), 辛い (painful), がっ かり (disappointed), もう (enough)
> 悲しい (sad), 残念だ (regretful), 寂しい (lonely),
> 辛い (painful), 同情 (sympathy)
> Fear ニュース (news), 恐ろしい (terrifying), 事件
> (incident), 心配だ (worried), 地震 (earthquake)
> 恐怖 (fear), 心配だ (worried), 恐ろしい (terrifying),
> 想像 (imagine), 心配 (worry)
> Anger イライラ (irritated), 怒る (angry), 立つ (stand), 悪い(bad), 怒り (anger)
> 怒り (anger), イライラ (irritation), 強い (strong),
> いらいら (irritated), 怒る (angry)
> Surprise なんて (what), びっくり (surprised), くらい
> (about), 凄い (amazing), 時代 (times)
> 驚き (surprise), 意外だ (unexpected), 感心
> (impressed), びっくり (surprised), 想像 (imagine)
> Disgust 嫌だ (dislike), 嫌悪 (disgust), 悪い (bad), 怒る
> (angry), 苦手だ (averse)
> 嫌だ (dislike), 嫌悪 (disgust), 想像 (imagine), 抱く
> (harbor), 申し訳ない (sorry)
> Neutral あまり (little), くださる (give), 信頼 (trust), 食べ る(eat), ところ (point)
> 書く (write), 同意 (agree), 答える (answer), 具体
> (specific), 説明 (explain)

Table 6: Top-5 frequent words by category for utterances and emotion transcriptions. similar valence frequently co-occur, such as “Dis-gust” with “Anger” and “Sadness.” Second, inter-estingly, emotions with opposing natures, like “Joy” and “Sadness,” also co-occur frequently. This co-occurrence is often not contradictory, as the two emotions can stem from different aspects of the situation. For example, transcriptions from the dataset included statements such as, “I am recall-ing both pleasant and bitter memories.” and “lis-tener is empathizing with me, but I also still feel sad when I recall the shopping scene.” Further-more, “Disgust” tends to co-occur broadly with a wide range of other emotions. This broad associa-tion may contribute to its ambiguity, potentially ex-plaining why it received the lowest inter-annotator agreement. These results suggest the complexity of human emotion, which often involves multiple, sometimes conflicting feelings simultaneously. 

6.3. Frequent Words for Emotion Categories 

In this section, to analyze the differences in lin-guistic features between utterances and emotion transcriptions, we extract and compare their re-spective characteristic words for each emotion la-bel. This analysis is based on the method con-ducted by Ide and Kawahara (2022). Specifically, we first use Juman++ (Tolmachev et al., 2018) to identify words appearing in an utterance or emotion transcription. Next, to filter out common words that appear across all emotion labels, we re-move any word with an IDF value less than half of the maximum IDF. Finally, we extract the highest-frequency words as characteristic words. Table 6 shows the Top-5 most frequent words for each emotion label. A common trend in both utter-ances and emotion transcriptions is the extraction of words that express the corresponding emotion category. For example, for joy, words like “excited” are frequent, and for sadness, “sad” is the most fre-quent. A key difference emerged between the two text types. In utterances, the characteristic words tended to include not only emotion words but also words describing events and actions that trigger emotions. For instance, for joy, the word “eat” is extracted, while for fear, words like “incident” and “earthquake” are prominent. In contrast, the words that are frequent in emotion transcriptions tend to express the subtle nuances of the emotion. For example, in the category of joy, words like “happy” and “excited” appeared, while for fear, “worried” and “terrifying” are extracted. This shows a linguis-tic difference in expression even within the same emotion category. For the neutral category has a trend of general words, rather than emotion words. Notably, for the emotion transcriptions, the words often used to de-scribe an utterance’s intent were extracted as char-acteristic words, “agree,” “answer,” and “explain.” 

## 7. Conclusion and Future Work 

We introduced Emotion Transcription in Conver-sation (ETC), a novel task for generating verbal-izations of a speaker’s emotional states, captur-ing fine-grained emotional nuances. To support this task, we constructed a new dataset of 1k Japanese dialogues annotated with self-reported emotion transcriptions and benchmarked baseline models. Our experimental results indicate the util-ity of our dataset for the ETC task, while also high-lighting the challenges. A key challenge is the po-tential gap between explicitly expressed emotions and the actual emotional state; even fine-tuned models failed to capture these nuances (see Ap-pendix F for failure cases). This suggests the need for models with enhanced capabilities to infer nu-anced emotional states. Future work can address this challenge from several directions. One is to explore sophisti-cated prompting (e.g., chain-of-thought) and ad-vanced fine-tuning objectives, such as RLHF or contrastive learning, to distinguish subtle expres-sions. Furthermore, speaker modeling could en-hance model capabilities. Building on prior ERC research, this approach could involve incorporat-ing speaker embeddings (Hu et al., 2021) or lever-aging personality traits we have collected, which previous studies have linked to emotional states in dialogue (Wang et al., 2024; Shinoda et al., 2025). Additionally, designing human evaluation for the ETC task is a critical future direction. Assess-ing emotion transcriptions requires capturing sub-tle nuances in emotional expressions. While LLM-based evaluators have shown promise in this re-gard, their reliability and potential biases war-rant careful examination. Comparing LLM-based and human evaluations would provide valuable in-sights into the validity of automatic evaluation for this task. 

## Limitations 

This study has the following limitations and chal-lenges: First, the ETC dataset was constructed using crowdsourcing with Japanese-speaking par-ticipants, which may introduce cultural and linguis-tic biases. To confirm the generalizability of this dataset, similar data collection efforts across di-verse languages and cultural contexts are required. Second, our dataset is limited to the text modal-ity, which may lack nonverbal cues essential for understanding humans’ emotional states. There-fore, constructing multimodal datasets that incor-porate audio and visual information is a promis-ing direction for enriching emotion understanding in real-world conversations. Third, the collected dialogues are relatively brief, comprising only 5 turns (10 utterances). This short context might be insufficient to adequately capture longer con-versational dynamics and the complexity of emo-tional states evolving over time. Additionally, our dataset comprises 1k dialogues, and it remains un-clear whether this scale is sufficient for training ro-bust ETC models. However, the crowdsourcing-based collection protocol employed in this study provides a feasible and promising approach for scaling up ETC datasets in the future. Lastly, addi-tional consideration is necessary regarding poten-tial use cases of emotional transcriptions (ET). Fu-ture research should explore how recognized ET can be effectively integrated into conversational systems to inform interactions and enhance emo-tional intelligence. 

## Ethical Considerations 

This study involves the use of data that cap-tures internal emotional states of individuals ex-pressed through natural language, which neces-sitates careful ethical consideration regarding the sensitivity of emotional content and the potential risks associated with AI applications. First, we col-lected the dialogue data and corresponding emo-tion transcriptions for each utterance through a Japanese crowdsourcing platform. Prior to the data collection, the participants were provided with clear explanations of the study’s purpose, the na-ture of the data being collected. The participants were asked to consent to the data use before they engaged in the dialogue. The collected data contains no personally identifiable information and was stored in an anonymized format. Also, the proposed Emotion Transcription in Conversation (ETC) task aims to generate natural language de-scriptions of a speaker’s internal emotional state based on conversational context. This technol-ogy holds potential for applications in dialogue sys-tems, educational support, and counseling. How-ever, if misused, it may raise serious ethical con-cerns, such as excessive inference of emotions, reinforcement of cultural biases, or surveillance and manipulation of emotional states. To address these risks, we evaluated the alignment between model-generated outputs and human annotations, and highlighted the current limitations and areas for improvement. Nevertheless, continued atten-tion must be paid to the ethical implications of how such trained models are deployed and used in real-world contexts. 

## Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 25H01382. 

## 8. Bibliographical References 

Huang-Cheng Chou, Wei-Cheng Lin, Chi-Chun Lee, and Carlos Busso. 2022. Exploiting anno-tators ’typed description of emotion perception to maximize utilization of ratings for speech emo-tion recognition. In ICASSP 2022 - 2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 7717– 7721. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), pages 4171–4186. P. Ekman, W. V. Friesen, M. J. O ’Sullivan, A. K. Chan, I. Diacoyanni-Tarlatzis, K. G. Heider, R. Krause, W. A. LeCompte, T. K. Pitcairn, P. E. Ricci-Bitti, K. R. Scherer, M. Tomita, and A. Tzavaras. 1987. Universals and cultural dif-ferences in the judgments of facial expressions of emotion. volume 53, pages 712–717. Shutong Feng, Guangzhi Sun, Nurul Lubis, Wen Wu, Chao Zhang, and Milica Gasić. 2024. Af-fect recognition in conversations using large lan-guage models. In Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL), pages 259–273. J. L. Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters. Psychological Bulletin, 76:378–382. Yumeng Fu, Junjie Wu, Zhongjie Wang, Meishan Zhang, Lili Shan, Yulin Wu, and Bingquan Liu. 2025. LaERC-S: Improving LLM-based emo-tion recognition in conversation with speaker characteristics. In International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), pages 6748–6761. Kazuki Fujii, Taishi Nakamura, Mengsay Loem, Hi-roki Iida, Masanari Ohi, Kakeru Hattori, Hirai Shota, Sakae Mizuki, Rio Yokota, and Naoaki Okazaki. 2024. Continual pre-training for cross-lingual LLM adaptation: Enhancing japanese language capabilities. In First Conference on Language Modeling. Deepanway Ghosal, Navonil Majumder, Soujanya Poria, Niyati Chhaya, and Erik Cambria. 2019. DialogueGCN: A graph convolutional neural network for emotion recognition in conversa-tion. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 154–164, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Jingwen Hu, Yuchen Liu, Jinming Zhao, and Qin Jin. 2021. MMGCN: Multimodal fu-sion via deep graph convolution network for emotion recognition in conversation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 5666–5675, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization Branches Out, pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023. G-eval: NLG evaluation using gpt-4 with better hu-man alignment. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2511–2522, Sin-gapore. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoy-anov. 2019. RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692. Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. FActScore: Fine-grained atomic evalua-tion of factual precision in long form text gener-ation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 12076–12100, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Atsushi Oshio, ABE Shingo, and Pino Cutrone. 2012. Development, reliability, and validity of the japanese version of ten item personality in-ventory (tipi-j). Japanese Journal of Personality, 21(1). Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for au-tomatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’02, page 311â￿￿318, USA. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Patrícia Pereira, Helena Moniz, and Joao Paulo Carvalho. 2025. Deep emotion recognition in textual conversations: A survey. Artificial Intelligence Review, 58(1):1–37. Soujanya Poria, Navonil Majumder, Rada Mihal-cea, and Eduard Hovy. 2019. Emotion recog-nition in conversation: Research challenges, datasets, and recent advances. IEEE access, 7:100943–100953. Xincheng Qin, Zhen Wu, Teng Zhang, Yuxuan Li, Jiaxing Luan, Bo Wang, Lidong Wang, and Jian Cui. 2023. BERT-ERC: Fine-tuning BERT is enough for emotion recognition in conversation. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), volume 37, pages 13492–13500. Arseny Tolmachev, Daisuke Kawahara, and Sadao Kurohashi. 2018. Juman++: A mor-phological analysis toolkit for scriptio con-tinua. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 54–59, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Yan Wang, Bo Wang, Yachao Zhao, Dongming Zhao, Xiaojia Jin, Jijun Zhang, Ruifang He, and Yuexian Hou. 2024. Emotion recognition in conversation via dynamic personality. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), pages 5711–5722, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL. Jintao Wen, Geng Tu, Rui Li, Dazhi Jiang, and Wenhua Zhu. 2023. Learning more from mixed emotions: a label refinement method for emo-tion recognition in conversations. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:1485–1499. Fangxu Yu, Junjie Guo, Zhen Wu, and Xinyu Dai. 2024. Emotion-anchored contrastive learn-ing framework for emotion recognition in con-versation. In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), pages 4521–4534. Xupeng Zha, Huan Zhao, and Zixing Zhang. 2024. ESIHGNN: Event-state interactions infused het-erogeneous graph neural network for conver-sational emotion recognition. In International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 11136–11140. Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kil-ian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert. In International Conference on Learning Representations. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track. 

## 9. Language Resource References 

C. Busso, R. Lotfian, K. Sridhar, A.N. Salman, W.-C. Lin, L. Goncalves, S. Parthasarathy, A. Reddy Naini, S.-G. Leem, L. Martinez-Lucas, H.-C. Chou, and P. Mote. 2025. The MSP-Podcast corpus. ArXiv e-prints (arXiv:2509.09791), pages 1–20. Carlos Busso, Murtaza Bulut, Chi-Chun Lee, Abe Kazemzadeh, Emily Mower, Samuel Kim, Jeannette N. Chang, Sungbok Lee, and Shrikanth S. Narayanan. 2008. IEMOCAP: Interactive emotional dyadic motion capture database. Language Resources and Evaluation, 42(4):335–359. Ankush Chatterjee, Kedhar Nath Narahari, Meghana Joshi, and Puneet Agrawal. 2019. Semeval-2019 task 3: Emocontext contextual emotion detection in text. In Proceedings of the 13th international workshop on semantic evaluation, pages 39–48. Chao-Chun Hsu, Sheng-Yeh Chen, Chuan-Chun Kuo, Ting-Hao Huang, and Lun-Wei Ku. 2018. EmotionLines: An emotion corpus of multi-party conversations. In International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC). Tatsuya Ide and Daisuke Kawahara. 2022. Build-ing a dialogue corpus annotated with expressed and experienced emotions. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop, pages 21–30, Dublin, Ireland. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Yanran Li, Hui Su, Xiaoyu Shen, Wenjie Li, Ziqiang Cao, and Shuzi Niu. 2017. Dailydialog: Amanually labelled multi-turn dialogue dataset. In International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP), pages 986– 995, Taipei, Taiwan. Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing. June M. Liu, He Cao, Renliang Sun, Rui Wang, Yu Li, and Jiaxing Zhang. 2025. CAPE: A Chinese dataset for appraisal-based emo-tional generation in large language models. In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT): Findings, pages 6291–6309. L. Martinez-Lucas, Mohammed Abdelwahab, and Carlos Busso. 2020. The MSP-conversation cor-pus. In Interspeech 2020, pages 1823–1827, Shanghai, China. Naoaki Okazaki, Kakeru Hattori, Hirai Shota, Hi-roki Iida, Masanari Ohi, Kazuki Fujii, Taishi Nakamura, Mengsay Loem, Rio Yokota, and Sakae Mizuki. 2024. Building a large japanese web corpus for large language models. In First Conference on Language Modeling. Soujanya Poria, Devamanyu Hazarika, Navonil Majumder, Rishi Naik, Erik Cambria, and Alexander Hoffmann. 2019. MELD: A multi-modal multi-party dataset for emotion recogni-tion in conversations. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 527–536, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hannah Rashkin, Eric Michael Smith, Margaret Li, and Y-Lan Boureau. 2019. Towards em-pathetic open-domain conversation models: Anew benchmark and dataset. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 5370–5381, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kazutoshi Shinoda, Nobukatsu Hojo, Kyosuke Nishida, Saki Mizuno, Keita Suzuki, Ryo Ma-sumura, Hiroaki Sugiyama, and Kuniko Saito. 2025. ToMATO: Verbalizing the mental states of role-playing LLMs for benchmarking theory of mind. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 39(2):1520–1528. Seyyed M. Zahiri and Jinho D. Choi. 2018. Emotion detection on tv show transcripts with sequence-based convolutional neural networks. In AAAI Workshops. A. Data Collection Details 

We conducted the collection of dialogue and cor-responding emotion transcriptions using a custom-built chat interface hosted on Google Sheets. The interface consists of multiple dialogue slots (as shown in Figure 3), each associated with a prede-fined emotion label. Each dialogue slot in the interface is composed of several key areas. Figure 3-A shows metadata for the dialogue, including a predefined emotion la-bel and a unique dialogue slot ID. This area also includes two cells for entering CrowdWorks user-names ̶ one for the Speaker and one for the Lis-tener. In these cells, participants were instructed to enter their username to join the conversation. They then wait to be paired with a dialogue partner or start the conversation if someone has already joined. Figure 3-B allows participants to exchange coordination messages during the task. This area is designed for task-related communication that does not directly affect the dialogue itself and fa-cilitates the accurate and smooth progression of tasks. For instance, participants used it to con-firm matching by entering “ Nice to meet you ”, in-form dialogue partners of their readiness with “ I’m ready ”, or notify other workers of a brief absence while waiting for matching with “ I’ll be back by 4:00 PM ”. Figure 3-C is the main body of the interaction, where participants input their utterances across five turns each. After a participant (e.g., the Speaker) enters their utterance into a cell in this area, the other participant (e.g., the Listener) re-sponds by entering their utterance in the next cell. Subsequently, while the Listener is typing their re-sponse, the Speaker writes an emotion transcrip-tion for their previous utterance by inserting a note into the same cell. These steps are repeated al-ternately for five turns. During the dialogue ses-sion, we required participants to write at least five characters in length for both the utterance and the corresponding emotion transcription. Figure 3-D consists of checkboxes for tracking task progress. The left column is for utterance in-put, and the right column is for emotion transcrip-tion. At each turn, participants check the corre-sponding box after completing each action. The di-alogue session is considered complete only when all checkboxes have been marked by both partici-pants. 

## B. Distribution of Participants’ Personality Traits 

Figure 4 illustrates the distribution of Big Five per-sonality traits among the 199 participants, mea-sured using the Japanese version of the Ten-Item Personality Inventory (TIPI-J) (Oshio et al., 2012). Scores for each dimension range from 2 to 14, with higher values indicating stronger tendencies. 

## C. Prompt Template for ETC Task 

The prompt template for the ETC task, trans-lated from Japanese, is shown in Figure 5. The model is expected to generate only the emotion transcription, in accordance with the definition. 

[TARGET_SPEAKER] is a placeholder for the tar-get speaker whose emotion transcription is to be generated, and [DIALOGUE] is a placeholder for the dialogue history. 

## D. Implementation Details 

We executed supervised fine-tuning of Llama-3.1-Swallow on two NVIDIA A100 80GB GPUs, using a batch size of 8 and training for 2 epochs. We applied 4-bit quantization to enhance memory effi-ciency and used the PagedAdamW8bit optimizer during training. Validation was conducted every 

200 steps. For hyperparameter tuning, we em-ployed a grid search with learning rates tested in 

{1e-05, 5e-05} and warm-up steps in {300, 700} . As a result, we selected a learning rate of 

1e-05 and 300 warm-up steps. During the inference, to ensure reproducibility, we set do_sample=False for Llama-3.1-Swallow and temperature to 0.0 for GPT-4.1. 

## E. Prompt Template for Fine-grained Evaluation 

The prompt templates for the fine-grained eval-uation of content faithfulness, translated from Japanese, are shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7. The decomposition prompt (Figure 6) instructs the model to output a list of atomic units of in-formation contained in the emotion transcription. 

[TRANSCRIPTION] is a placeholder for the emo-tion transcription to be decomposed. The entail-ment prompt (Figure 7) asks the model to deter-mine whether each unit of information is entailed by the target transcription. [SOURCE_TEXT] and 

[TARGET_TEXT] are placeholders for the source and target emotion transcriptions, respectively. 

## F. Failure Case Analysis for the ETC Task 

Table 7 presents a cherry-picked example of where the models failed to predict the speaker’s emotion transcription. In this case, the ground-truth transcription expresses the speaker’s delight at the partner’s willingness to delve into details. ABCDFigure 3: The dialogue slot used for conducting conversations and entering emotion transcriptions. 

Figure 4: Distribution of Big Five personality traits among the 199 participants. However, every model instead focuses on the speaker’s shock, illustrating a tendency to prior-itize immediately preceding negative cues over more nuanced, interaction-driven emotions. This suggests that ETC models struggle to incorporate the partner’s supportive attitude when inferring a speaker’s emotional state. # Task Definition 

You will be given a multi -turn dialogue between two speakers, Speaker A and Speaker B. 

Your task is to infer the emotion transcription of the speaker who spoke the last utterance (either Speaker A or Speaker 

B) at the time it was uttered. 

# Definition of Emotion Transcription 

Emotion transcription is defined as a verbalization of the internal emotional state or intention that a participant in the 

dialogue held at the time of their utterance. It is a linguistic expression of the psychological background behind the 

utterance, inc luding  “what they were thinking, ” “why they chose those words, ” or  “how they were feeling ” when they 

spoke. 

# Output Rules 

1. Predict the emotion transcription corresponding to the last utterance of the specified target speaker. 

2. Generate the emotion transcription in a tone as if the speaker themselves were describing it. 

3. Do not enclose the emotion transcription in quotation marks or brackets. 

4. Do not include any extra explanations after the emotion transcription, nor include the emotion transcriptions of other 

speakers. 

5. When referring to the dialogue partner, use the term  “my dialogue partner ”; when referring to yourself, use  “I. ”

Target speaker for emotion transcription prediction:  [TARGET_SPEAKER ]

Dialogue: 

-----

[DIALOGUE] 

-----

[TARGET_SPEAKER] ’s emotion transcription: Figure 5: The prompt template for the ETC task (Translated from Japanese). The model is expected to generate only the emotion transcription. Your task is to decompose a given emotion transcription into semantically independent minimal emotional units. 

# Definition of Emotion Transcription 

Emotion transcription is defined as a verbalization of the internal emotional state or intention that a participant in the 

dialogue held at the time of their utterance. It is a linguistic expression of the psychological background behind the 

utterance, inc luding  “what they were thinking, ” “why they chose those words, ” or  “how they were feeling ” when they 

spoke. 

# Guidelines 

- Extract only internal states  aligned with  the definition  above : emotions (e.g.,  “felt  sad, ” “empathized, ” “was  grateful ”)

and intentions (e.g.,  “tried to ..., ” “wanted to ..., ” “felt that ... ”). 

- Do not include descriptions of objective facts or actions (e.g.,  “likes/dislikes ..., ” “performed ..., ” “is explaining ... ”). 

- However, if the transcription contains a dialogue participant's  “feelings, ” “thoughts, ” or  “recollections ” regarding those 

facts or actions, those  description s must be extracted. 

- Ensure that each  atomic  unit  is  semantically complete on  its own.  In particular, the use of demonstratives such as  “that, ”

“this, ” or  “it ” is prohibited. 

- If no emotional element is present, output "[No emotional element s]." 

(8 examples) 

Decompose the following emotion transcription into semantically independent minimal emotional units: 

[TRANSCRIPTION] Figure 6: The prompt template for the decomposition step in the fine-grained evaluation (Translated from Japanese) You are given two emotion transcriptions: a  “premise ” and a  “hypothesis. ” Your task is to determine whether the 

hypothesis is supported by the premise by **comparing only their surface -level content**. 

# Mandatory Rules 

- **Inferring implicit causal relationships or value judgments is  prohibited.* *

- Verify whether the **subject (whose emotion or intention)  and the  object** of the  emotional states  match between the 

premise and the hypothesis. 

- Any  emotional states not  **explicitly** stated in the premise must not be considered as implied. 

- Ignore differences in tense  in  your judgment. 

# Definition of Emotion Transcription 

Emotion transcription is defined as a verbalization of the internal emotional state or intention that a participant in the 

dialogue held at the time of their utterance. It is a linguistic expression of the psychological background behind the 

utterance, inc luding “what they were thinking,” “why they chose those words,” or “how they were feeling” when they 

spoke. 

# Guidelines 

**Supported** 

- The hypothesis can be **definitively  determined to be entailed** solely from the content of the premise. 

**Not Supported** 

- The emotional element in the hypothesis is **not present in the premise and cannot be definitively determined**, or it 

**clearly contradicts** the premise. 

**Neutral** 

- Only the **core  emotional  element  matches**, while the **validity of secondary elements is uncertain**. 

# Output Format 

Return only a pure JSON object strictly following the format below. 

```json 

{

“reasoning ”: “<Briefly describe the rationale for your judgment here> ”,

“answer ”: “<One of: Supported / Neutral / Not Supported> ”

}

``` 

(9 examples) 

Example 10 

Premise: [SOURCE_TEXT] 

Hypothesis: [TARGET_TEXT] Figure 7: The prompt template for the entailment step in the fine-grained evaluation (Translated from Japanese). Context Speaker A : The other day, my favorite baseball player suffered a serious injury and will be out for three months. ( 先日、自分が特に応援している野球選手が全治 3 ヵ月の大怪我を負ってしまいました。 )

Speaker B : Three months? Are you talking about Okamoto? ( 全治 3 ヶ月というと、それはもしかし て岡本選手ですか？ )

Speaker A : Yes. That news was really shocking. ( そうです。あの出来事は本当にショックでした。 )

Speaker B : I thought so. He got hurt in that collision with Nakano from the Hanshin Tigers, and I know how devastating that is for a Giants fan. ( やっぱりそうですか。阪神の中野選手との交錯でケガをし たと思いますが巨人ファンの方からすると彼がいなくなるのは大ダメージですね。 )

Speaker A : Right. At first they reported it as a one-month muscle injury, but after a detailed examina-tion it turned out to be a ligament tear requiring three months of recovery, which made it even more shocking. ( はい。最初は筋肉の損傷で全治 1 カ月と報道されていたのにその後、精密検査で靭帯損 傷で全治 3 ヵ月となったので、余計にショックでしたね。 )

Output Ground-Truth : I feel very happy that my dialogue partner could dive so deeply and discuss the details with me. ( 相手がかなり話を掘り下げた詳しいことまで話せることがとても嬉しいと感じています。 )

GPT-4.1 (zero-shot) : I feel even more disappointed and shocked because the injury was worse than initially reported, and I’m explaining the details so they understand how bad it really is. ( 自分が応援し ている選手のケガが思ったよりも重かったことに対して、最初の報道よりも悪い結果になってしま い、残念な気持ちやショックがさらに大きくなったと感じている。相手にその気持ちを理解しても らいたくて、詳しく説明している。 )

GPT-4.1 (4-shot) : I wanted my partner to understand how shocked I was. ( 相手に自分のショックな 気持ちを理解してもらいたかったです。 )

Llama-3.1 (zero-shot) : That incident was really shocking. ( あの出来事は本当にショックでした。 )

Llama-3.1 (4-shot) : I feel relieved that my partner understands my feelings and I’m seeking empa-thy. ( 相手が自分の気持ちを理解してくれていることに安心し、共感を求めています。 )

Llama-3.1 (fine-tuned) : I answered their question, recalled what happened, and told them how much more shocked I felt. ( 相手の質問に答えつつ、当時の状況を思い出して、さらにショックを受けたこ とを伝えました。 )

Table 7: Failure case study of emotion transcription generation (translated from Japanese). The outputs are the emotion transcriptions for Speaker A’s final utterance.